VI. The Constant Capital of Department I

It remains for us to analyse the constant capital of department I,
amounting to 4,000c. This value is equal to the value ; appearing anew in the commodity-product I ; of the means of production consumed in
the creation of this quantity of commodities. This re-appearing value,
which was not produced in the process of production of I, but entered
into it during the preceding year as constant value, as the given value of
its means of production, exists now in the entire part of commodity mass
I not absorbed by category II. And the value of this quantity of commodities
thus left in the hands of the I capitalists equals two-thirds of the
value of their entire annual commodity-product. In the case of the
individual capitalist producing some particular means of production we
could say: He sells his commodity-product; he converts it into money.
By converting it into money he has also reconverted into money the
constant portion of the value of his product. With this portion of value
converted into money he then buys his means of production once more
from other sellers of commodities or transforms the constant portion of
the value of his product into a bodily form in which it can resume its
function of productive constant capital. But now this assumption
becomes impossible. The capitalist class of I comprises the totality of
the capitalists producing means of production. Besides, the commodity-product
of 4,000, which is left on their hands, is a portion of the social
product which cannot be exchanged for any other, because no such
other portion of the annual product remains. With the exception of these
4,000, all the remainder has been disposed of. One portion has been
absorbed by the social consumption-fund, and another portion has to
replace the constant capital of department II, which has already
exchanged everything it could dispose of in an exchange with
department I.

The difficulty is solved very easily if we remember that the entire
commodity-product I in its bodily form consists of means of production,
i.e., of the material elements of the constant capital itself. We meet here
the same phenomenon which we witnessed before under II, only in a
different aspect. In the case of II the entire commodity-product consisted
of articles of consumption. Hence one portion of it, measured by the
wages plus surplus-value contained in this product, could be consumed
by its own producers. Here, in the case of I, the entire product consists
of means of production, of buildings, machinery, vessels, raw and
auxiliary materials, etc. One portion of them, namely that replacing the
constant capital employed in this sphere, can therefore immediately
function anew in its bodily form as a component of the productive
capital: So far as it goes into circulation, it circulates within class I. In II
a part of the commodity-product is individually consumed in kind by its
own producers while in I a portion of the product is productively
consumed in kind by its capitalist producers.

In the part of the commodity-product I equal to 4,000c the
capital-value consumed in this category re-appears, and does so in a
bodily form in which it can immediately resume its function of
productive constant capital. In II that portion of the commodity-product
of 3,000 whose value is equal to the wages plus the surplus-value
(equal to 1,000) passes directly into the individual consumption of the
capitalists and labourers of II, while on the other hand the constant
capital-value of this commodity-product (equal to 2,000) cannot re-enter
the productive consumption of the II capitalists but must be replaced by
exchange with I.

In I, on the contrary, that portion of its commodity-product of 6,000
whose value is equal to the wages plus the surplus-value (equal to
2,000) does not pass into the individual consumption of its producers,
and cannot do so on account of its bodily form. It must first be
exchanged with II. Contrariwise the constant portion of the value of this
product, equal to 4,000, exists in a bodily form in which ; taking the
capitalist class I as a whole ; it can immediately resume its function of
constant capital of that class. In other words, the entire product of
department I consists of use-values which, on account of their bodily
form, can under a capitalist mode of production serve only as elements
of constant capital. Hence one-third (2,000) of this product of 6,000
replaces the constant capital of department II, and the other two thirds
the constant capital of department I.

The constant capital I consists of a great number of different groups
of capital invested in the various branches of production of means of
production, so much in iron works, so much in coal-mines, etc. Every
one of these groups of capital, or every one of these social group
capitals, is in its turn composed of a larger or smaller number of
independently functioning individual capitals. In the first place, the
capital of society, for instance 7,500 (which may mean millions, etc.) is
composed of various groups of capital; the social capital of 7,500 is
divided into separate parts, every one of which is invested in a special
branch of production; each portion of the social capital-value invested in
some particular branch of production consists, so far as its bodily form is
concerned, partly of means of production required in that particular
sphere of production, partly of the labour-power needed in that business
and trained accordingly, variously modified by division of labour,
according to the specific kind of labour to be performed in each
individual sphere of production. Each portion of social capital invested in
any particular branch of production in its turn consists of the sum of the
individual capitals invested in it and functioning independently. This
patently applies to both departments, I as well as II.

As for the constant capital-value re-appearing in I in the form of its
commodity-product, it re-enters in part as means of production into the
particular sphere of production (or even into the individual business)
from which it emerges as product; for instance corn into the production
of corn, coal into the production of coal, iron in the form of machines
into the production of iron, etc.

However since the partial products constituting the constant capital-value
I do not return directly to their particular or individual sphere of
production, they merely change their place. They pass in their bodily
form to some other sphere of production of department I, while the
product of other spheres of production of department I replaces them in
kind. It is merely a change of place of these products. All of them re-enter
as factors replacing constant capital in I, only instead of the same
group of I they enter another. Since an exchange takes place here
between the individuals capitalist of I, it is an exchange of one bodily
form of constant capital for another bodily form of constant capital, of
one kind of means of production for other kinds of means of production.
It is an exchange of the different individual parts of constant capital I
among themselves. Products which do not serve directly as means of
production in their own sphere are transferred from their place of
production to another and thus mutually replace one another. In other
words (similarly to what we saw in the case of the surplus-value II),
every capitalist I draws from this quantity of commodities, proportionally
to his share in the constant capital of 4,000, the means of production
required by him. If production were socialised instead of capitalistic,
these products of department I would evidently just as regularly be
redistributed as means of production to the various branches of this
department, for purposes of reproduction, one portion remaining directly
in that sphere of production from which it emerged as a product,
another passing over to other places of production, thereby giving rise to
a constant to-and-fro movement between the various places of
production in this department.