3. The Constant Part of Capital

Let us now see how Adam Smith tries to spirit the constant part of the
capital-value away from the commodity-value.

"In the price of corn, for example, one part pays the rent of the
landlord."

The origin of this constituent of value has no more to
do with the circumstance that it is paid to the landlord and forms a
revenue for him in the shape of rent than the origin of the other
constituents of value has to do with the fact that as profit and wages
they form sources of revenue.

"Another [portion] pays the wages or maintenance of the labourers" ["and labouring cattle," he adds] "employed in producing it, and the third pays the profit of the farmer. These three parts seem" [they seem indeed] "either immediately or ultimately to make up the whole
price of corn." [40]

This entire price, i.e., the determination of its magnitude, is absolutely independent of its
distribution among three kinds of people.

"A fourth part, it may perhaps be thought, is necessary for replacing the stock of the farmer, or for compensating the wear and tear of his labouring cattle, and other instruments of husbandry. But it must be considered that the
price of any instrument of husbandry, such as a labouring horse, is
itself made up of the same three parts: the rent of the land upon
which he is reared, the labour of tending and rearing him, and the
profits of the farmer who advances both the rent of this land, and the
wages of this labour. Though the price of the corn, therefore, may pay
the price as well as the maintenance of the horse, the whole price
still resolves itself either immediately or ultimately into the same
three parts of rent, labour" (he means wages), "and profit." (Book I, Ch. 6, p. 42.)

This is verbatim all that Adam Smith has to say in support of his
astonishing doctrine. His proof consists simply in the repetition of
the same assertion. He admits, for instance, that the price of corn
does not only consist of v + s, but also of the price of the means of
production consumed in the production of corn, hence of a
capital-value not invested in labour-power by the farmer. But, he
says, the prices of all these means of production resolve themselves
into v + s, the same as the price of corn. He forgets, however, to
add: and, moreover, into the prices of the means of production
consumed in their own creation. He refers us from one branch of
production to another, and from that to a third. The contention that
the entire price of commodities resolves itself "immediately" or
"ultimately" into v + s would not be a hollow subterfuge only if he were able to demonstrate that the commodities whose price resolves
itself immediately into c (price of consumed means of production) + v
+ s, are ultimately compensated by commodities which completely
replace those "consumed means of production," and which are themselves
produced by the mere outlay of variable capital, i.e., by a mere
investment of capital in labour-power. The price of these last
commodity-products would then be immediately v + s. Consequently the
price of the former, c + v + s, where c stands for the constant part of
capital, would also be ultimately resolvable into v + s. Adam Smith
himself did not believe that he had furnished such a proof by his
example of the collectors of Scotch pebbles, who, according to him 1)
do not generate surplus-value of any description, but produce only
their own wages, and 2) do not employ any means of production (they
do, however, employ them, such as baskets, sacks, and other containers
for carrying the pebbles).

We have already seen above that Adam Smith himself later on overthrows
his own theory, without however being conscious of his contradictions.
But their source is to be found precisely in his scientific premises.
The capital converted into labour produces a greater value than its
own. How? Says Adam Smith: by the labourers imparting during the
process of production to the things on which they work a value which
forms not only an equivalent for their own purchase price, but also a
surplus-value (profit and rent) apportioned not to them but to their
employers. That is all they accomplish, and all they can accomplish.
And what is true of the industrial labour of one day is true of the
labour set in motion by the entire capitalist class during one year.
Hence the aggregate mass of the annual value produced by society can
resolve itself only into v + s, into an equivalent by which the
labourers replace the capital-value expended for the purchase of their
own labour-power, and into an additional value which they must deliver
over and above this to their employers. But these two elements of
commodity-value form at the same time sources of revenue for the
various classes engaged in reproduction: the first is the source of
wages, the revenue of the labourers; the second that of surplus-value,
a portion of which is retained by the industrial capitalist in the
form of profit, while another is given up by him as rent, the revenue
of the landlord. Where, then, should another portion of value come
from, when the annual value-product contains no other elements than
v + s? We are proceeding here from simple reproduction. Since the entire
quantity of annual labour resolves itself into labour needed for the
reproduction of the capital-value laid out in labour-power, and into
labour needed for the creation of surplus-value, where should the
labour for the production of a capital-value not laid out in
labour-power come from?

The case is as follows:

1) Adam Smith determines the value of a commodity by the amount of
labour which the wage-labourer adds to the subject of labour. He calls
it literally "materials," since he is dealing with manufacture,
which itself is working up products of labour. But this does not alter
the matter. The value which the labourer adds to a thing (and this
"adds" is the expression of Adam Smith) is entirely independent of whether or not this object to which value is added had itself any
value before this addition. The labourer therefore produces a value in
the form of a commodity. This, according to Adam Smith, is partly an
equivalent for his wages, and this part, then, is determined by the
magnitude of value of his wages; depending on that magnitude he has to
add labour in order to produce or reproduce a value equal to that of
his wages. On the other hand the labourer adds more labour over and
above the limit so drawn, and this creates surplus-value for the
capitalist employing him. Whether this surplus-value remains entirely
in the hands of the capitalist or parts of it are yielded by him to
third persons, does not in the least alter either the qualitative
(that is at all surplus-value) or the quantitative (magnitude)
determination of the surplus-value added by the wage-labourer. It is
value the same as any other portion of the value of the product, but
it differs in that the labourer has not received any equivalent for
it, nor will receive any later on, in that, on the contrary, this
value is appropriated by the capitalist without any equivalent. The
total value of a commodity is determined by the quantity of labour
expended by the labourer in its production; one portion of this total
value is determined by the fact that it is equal to the value of the
wages, i.e., an equivalent for them. The second part, the
surplus-value, is, therefore, necessarily likewise determined as equal
to the total value of the product minus that part of its value which
is equivalent to the wages; hence equal to the excess of the value
produced in the making of the commodity over that part of the value
contained in it which is an equivalent for his wages.

2) That which is true of a commodity produced in some individual
industrial establishment by any individual labourer is true of the
annual product of all branches of business as a whole. That which is
true of the day's work of some individual productive labourer is
true of the year's work set in motion by the entire class of
productive labourers. It "fixes" (Adam Smith's expression) in
the annual product of a total value determined by the quantity of the
annual labour expended, and this total value resolves itself into one
portion determined by that part of the annual labour wherewith the
working-class creates an equivalent of its annual wages, in fact,
these wages themselves; and into another portion determined by the
additional annual labour by which the labourer creates surplus-value
for the capitalist class. The annual value-product contained in the
annual product consists therefore of but two elements: namely, the
equivalent of the annual wages received by the working-class, and the
surplus-value annually provided for the capitalist class. Now, the
annual wages are the revenue of the working-class, and the annual
quantity of surplus-value the revenue of the capitalist class; hence
both of them represent the relative shares in the annual fund for
consumption (this view is correct when describing simple reproduction)
and are realised in it. There is, then, no room left anywhere for the
constant capital-value, for the reproduction of the capital
functioning in the form of means of production. And Adam Smith states
explicitly in the introduction to his work that all portions of the
value of commodities which serve as revenue coincide with the annual
product of labour intended for the social fund for consumption:

"To explain in what has consisted the revenue of the great body of the people, or what has been the nature of those funds, which, in
different ages and nations, have supplied their annual consumption, is
the object of these first Four Books." (p. 12.)

And in the very
first sentence of the introduction we read:

"The annual labour of every nation is the fund, which originally supplies it with all the necessaries and conveniences of life which it annually consumes, and which consists always either in the immediate produce of that labour,
or in what is purchased with that produce from other nations." (p. 11.)

Now Adam Smith's first mistake consists in equating the value
of the annual product to the newly produced annual
value. The latter is only the product of labour of the past
year, the former includes besides all elements of value consumed in
the making of the annual product, but which were produced in the
preceding and partly even earlier years: means of production whose
value merely re-appears ; which, as far as their value is concerned,
have been neither produced nor reproduced by the labour expended in
the past year. By this confusion Adam Smith spirits away the constant
portion of the value of the annual product. This confusion rests on
another error in his fundamental conception: He does not distinguish
the two-fold nature of labour itself: of labour which creates value by
expending labour-power, and of labour as concrete, useful work, which
creates articles of use (use-values). The total quantity of the
commodities fabricated annually, in other words, the total annual
product is the product of the useful labour active during the past
year; it is only due to the fact that socially employed labour was
spent in a ramified system of useful kinds of labour that all these
commodities exist; it is due to this fact alone that the value of the
means of production consumed in the production of commodities and
reappearing in a new bodily form is preserved in their total value.
The total annual product, then, is the result of the useful labour
expended during the year; but only a part of the value of the annual
product has been created during the year; this portion is the annual
value-product, in which the quantity of labour set in motion during
the year is represented.

Hence, if Adam Smith says in the passage just cited:

"The annual labour of every nation is the fund which originally supplies it with all the necessaries and conveniences of life which it annually consumes, etc.,"

he takes the one-sided standpoint of solely useful
labour, which has indeed given all these means of subsistence their
consumable form. But he forgets that this was impossible without the
assistance of instruments and subjects of labour supplied by former
years, and that, therefore, the "annual labour," while it created
value, did not create all the value of the products fabricated by it;
that the value newly produced is smaller than the value of the
product.

While we cannot reproach Adam Smith for going in this analysis no
farther than all his successors (although a step in the right
direction could already be discerned among the physiocrats), he
subsequently gets lost in a chaos and this mainly because his
"esoteric" conception of the value of commodities in general is
constantly contravened by exoteric conceptions, which on the whole
prevail with him, and yet his scientific instinct permits the esoteric
standpoint to re-appear from time to time.