One of the most obvious peculiarities of the movement in circuits of industrial
capital, and therefore also of capitalist production, is the fact that
on one hand the component elements of productive capital are derived from
the commodity-market and must be continually renewed out of it, bought
as commodities; and that on the other hand the product of the labour-process
emerges from it as a commodity and must be continually sold anew as a commodity.
Compare for instance a modern farmer of the Scotch lowlands with an old-fashioned
small peasant on the Continent. The former sells his entire product and
has therefore to replace all its elements, even his seed, in the market;
the latter consumes the greater part of his product directly, buys and
sells as little as possible, fashions tools, makes clothing, etc., so far
as possible himself.

Natural economy, money-economy, and credit-economy have therefore
been placed in opposition to one another as being the three characteristic
economic forms of movement in social production.

In the first place these three forms do not represent equivalent
phases of development. The so-called credit-economy is merely a form of
the money-economy, since both terms express functions or modes of exchange
among the producers themselves. In developed capitalist production, the
money-economy appears only as the basis of the credit-economy. The money-economy
and credit-economy thus correspond only to different stages in the development
of capitalist production, but they are by no means independent forms of
exchange vis-à-vis natural economy. With the same justification
one might contrapose as equivalents the very different forms of natural
economy to those two economies.

In the second place, since it is not the economy, i.e., the process
of production itself that is emphasised as the distinguishing mark of the
two categories, money-economy and credit-economy, but rather the mode of
exchange ; corresponding to that economy ; between the various agents
of production, or producers, the same should apply to the first category.
Hence exchange economy instead of natural economy. A completely isolated
natural economy, such as the Inca state of Peru, would not come under any
of these categories.

In the third place the money-economy is common to all commodity
production and the product appears as a commodity in the most varied organisms
of social production. Consequently what characterises capitalist production
would then be only the extent to which the product is created as an article
of commerce, as a commodity, and hence the extent also to which its own
constituent elements must enter again as articles of commerce, as commodities,
into the economy from which it emerges.

As a matter of fact capitalist production is commodity production
as the general form of production. But it is so and becomes so more and
more in the course of its development only because labour itself appears
here as a commodity, because the labourer sells his labour, that is, the
function of his labour-power, and our assumption is that he sells it at
its value, determined by its cost of reproduction. To the extent that labour
becomes wage-labour, the producer becomes an industrial capitalist. For
this reason capitalist production (and hence also commodity production)
does not reach its full scope until the direct agricultural producer becomes
a wage-labourer. In the relation of capitalist and wage-labourer, the money-relation,
the relation between the buyer and the seller, becomes a relation inherent
in production. But this relation has its foundation in the social character
of production, not in the mode of exchange. The latter conversely emanates
from the former. It is, however, quite in keeping with the bourgeois horizon,
everyone being engrossed in the transaction of shady business, not to see
in the character of the mode of production the basis of the mode of exchange
corresponding to it, but vice versa.[7]