Capital Vol. III Part VII

Revenues and their Sources

Chapter 52. Classes

The owners merely of labour-power, owners of capital, and land-owners, whose
respective sources of income are wages, profit and ground-rent, in other words,
wage-labourers, capitalists and land-owners, constitute then three big classes
of modern society based upon the capitalist mode of production.

In England, modern society is indisputably most highly and classically
developed in economic structure. Nevertheless, even here the stratification of
classes does not appear in its pure form. Middle and intermediate strata even
here obliterate lines of demarcation everywhere (although incomparably less in
rural districts than in the cities). However, this is immaterial for our
analysis. We have seen that the continual tendency and law of development of the
capitalist mode of production is more and more to divorce the means of
production from labour, and more and more to concentrate the scattered means of
production into large groups, thereby transforming labour into wage-labour and
the means of production into capital. And to this tendency, on the other hand,
corresponds the independent separation of landed property from capital and
labour,[58] or the transformation of all landed
property into the form of landed property corresponding to the capitalist mode
of production.

The first question to be answered is this: What constitutes a class? ; and
the reply to this follows naturally from the reply to another question, namely:
What makes wage-labourers, capitalists and landlords constitute the three great
social classes?

At first glance ; the identity of revenues and sources of revenue. There
are three great social groups whose members, the individuals forming them, live
on wages, profit and ground-rent respectively, on the realisation of their
labour-power, their capital, and their landed property.

However, from this standpoint, physicians and officials, e.g., would also
constitute two classes, for they belong to two distinct social groups, the
members of each of these groups receiving their revenue from one and the same
source. The same would also be true of the infinite fragmentation of interest
and rank into which the division of social labour splits labourers as well as
capitalists and landlords-the latter, e.g., into owners of vineyards, farm
owners, owners of forests, mine owners and owners of fisheries.

[Here the manuscript breaks off.]

Notes

58
F. List remarks correctly: "The
prevalence of a self-sufficient economy on large estates demonstrates solely the
lack of civilisation, means of communication, domestic trades and wealthy
cities. It is to be encountered, therefore, throughout Russia, Poland, Hungary
and Mecklenburg. Formerly, it was also prevalent in England; with the advance of
trades and commerce, however, this was replaced by the breaking up into middle
estates and the leasing of land." (Die Ackerverfassung, die
Zwergwirtschaft und die Auswanderung, 1842, p.10.)