3. Results

The following is to be noted with reference to replacement of fixed
capital:

If ; all other things, and not only the scale of production, but above
all the productivity of labour, remaining the same ; a greater part of the
fixed element of IIc expires than did the year before, and hence a greater
part must be renewed in kind, then that part of the fixed capital which is
as yet only on the way to its demise and is to be replaced meanwhile in
money until its day of expiry, must shrink in the same proportion,
inasmuch as it was assumed that the sum (and the sum of the value) of
the fixed part of capital functioning in II remains the same. This however
brings with it the following circumstances. First: If the greater part of
commodity-capital I consists of elements of the fixed capital of IIc, then a
correspondingly smaller portion consists of circulating component parts
of IIc, because the total production of I for IIc remains unchanged. If one of these parts increases the other decreases, and vice versa. On the
other hand the total production of class II also retains the same volume.
But how is this possible if its raw materials, semi-finished products, and
auxiliary materials (i.e., the circulating elements of constant capital II)
decrease? Second: the greater part of fixed capital IIc, restored in its money-form, flows to I to be reconverted from its money-form into its
bodily form. So there is a greater flow of money to I, aside from the
money circulating between I and II merely for the exchange of their
commodities; more money which is not instrumental in effecting mutual
commodity exchange, but acts only one-sidedly in the function of a
means of purchase. But then the mass of commodities of IIc, which is
the bearer of the wear-and-tear equivalent ; and thus the mass of
commodities II that must only be exchanged for money I and not for
commodities I ; would also shrink proportionately. More money would
have flown from II to I as mere means of purchase, and there would be
fewer commodities II in relation to which I would have to function as a
mere buyer. A greater portion of Is ; for Iv is already converted into commodities II ; would not therefore be convertible into commodities II, but would persist in the form of money.

The opposite case, in which the reproduction of demises of fixed
capital II in a certain year is less and on the contrary the depreciation
part greater, needs no further discussion.

There would be a crisis ; a crisis of over-production ; in spite of
reproduction on an unchanging scale.

In short, if under simple reproduction and other unchanged
conditions ; particularly under unchanged productive power, total
volume and intensity of labour ; no constant proportion is assumed
between expiring fixed capital (to be renewed) and fixed capital still
continuing to function in its old bodily form (merely adding to the
products value in compensation of its depreciation), then, in the one
case the mass of circulating component parts to be reproduced would
remain the same while the mass of fixed component parts to be
reproduced would be increased. Therefore the total production I would
have to grow or, even aside from money-relations, there would be a
deficit in reproduction.

In the other case, if the size of fixed capital II to be reproduced in
kind should proportionately decrease and hence the component part of
fixed capital II, which must now be replaced only in money, should
increase in the same ratio, then the quantity of the circulating
component parts of constant capital II reproduced by I would remain
unchanged, while that of the fixed component parts to be reproduced
would decrease. Hence either decrease in aggregate production of I, or
surplus (as previously deficit) and surplus that is not to be converted into
money.

True, the same labour can, in the first case, turn out a greater
product through increasing productivity, extension or intensity, and the
deficit could thus be covered in that case. But such a change would not
take place without a shifting of capital and labour from one line of
production of I to another, and every such shift would call forth
momentary disturbances. Furthermore (in so far as extension and
intensification of labour would mount), I would have for exchange more
of its own value for less of II's value. Hence there would be a
depreciation of the product of I.

The reverse would take place in the second case, where I must curtail
its production, which implies a crisis for its labourers and capitalists, or
produce a surplus, which again spells crisis. Such surplus is not an evil
in itself, but an advantage; however it is an evil under capitalist
production.

Foreign trade could help out in either case: in the first case in order to
convert commodities I held in the form of money into articles of
consumption, and in the second case to dispose of the commodity
surplus. But since foreign trade does not merely replace certain elements
(also with regard to value), it only transfers the contradictions to a wider
sphere and gives them greater latitude.

Once the capitalist form of reproduction is abolished, it is only a
matter of the volume of the expiring portion ; expiring and therefore to
be reproduced in kind ; of fixed capital (the capital which in our
illustration functions in the production of articles of consumption)
varying in various successive years. If it is very large in a certain year (in
excess of the average mortality, as is the case with human beings), then
it is certainly so much smaller in the next year. The quantity of raw
materials, semi-finished products, and auxiliary materials required for
the annual production of the articles of consumption ; provided other
things remain equal ; does not decrease in consequence. Hence the
aggregate production of means of production would have to increase in
the one case and decrease in the other. This can be remedied only by a
continuous relative over-production. There must be on the one hand a
certain quantity of fixed capital produced in excess of that which is
directly required; on the other hand, and particularly, there must be a
supply of raw materials, etc., in excess of the direct annual requirements
(this applies especially to means of subsistence). This sort of over-production
is tantamount to control by society over the material means
of its own reproduction. But within capitalist society it is an element of
anarchy.

This illustration of fixed capital, on the basis of an unchanged scale of
reproduction, is striking. A disproportion of the production of fixed and
circulating capital is one of the favourite arguments of the economists in
explaining crises. That such a disproportion can and must arise even
when the fixed capital is merely preserved, that it can and must do so
on the assumption of ideal normal production on the basis of simple
reproduction of the already functioning social capital is something new
to them.

Notes

44. These figures again do not coincide with those previously assumed. But this is
immaterial since it is merely a question of proportions. ; F.E.