VIII. The Constant Capital in Both Departments

The analysis of the total value of the product of 9,000, and of the
categories into which it is divided, does not present any greater difficulty
than that of the value produced by an individual capital. On the contrary,
they are identical.

The entire annual social product here contains three social working-days,
each of one year. The value expressed by each one of these
working-days is 3,000, so that the value expressed by the total product
is equal to 3 × 3,000, or 9,000.

Furthermore the following portions of this working time have elapsed
prior to the one-year process of production, the product of which we are
now analysing: In department I four-thirds of a working-day (with a
product worth 4,000), and in department II two-thirds of a working-day
(with a product worth 2,000), making a total of two social working-days
with a product worth 6,000. For this reason 4,000 Ic + 2,000 IIc = 6,000c figure as the value of the means of production, or the constant capital-value re-appearing in the total value of the social product.
Furthermore one-third of the social working-day of one year newly
added in department I is necessary labour, or labour replacing the value
of the variable capital of 1,000 I and paying the price of the labour
employed by I. In the same way one-sixth of a social working-day in II is
necessary labour with a value of 500. Hence 1,000 Iv + 500 IIv = 1,500v, expressing the value of one half of the social working-day, is the
value-expression of the first half of the aggregate working-day added this
year and consisting of necessary labour.

Finally, in department I one-third of the aggregate working-day, with
a product worth 1,000, is surplus-labour, and in department II one-sixth
of the working-day, with a product worth 500, is surplus-labour.

Together they constitute the other half of the added aggregate working-day.
Hence the total surplus-value produced is equal to 1,000 Is + 500
IIs, or 1,500s.

Thus:

The constant capital portion of the value of the social product (c):

Two working-days expended prior to the process of

production; expression of value = 6,000.

Necessary labour (v) expended during the year:

One half of a working-day expended on the annual

production; expression of value 1,500.

Surplus-labour (s) expended during the year:

One half of a working-day expended on the annual

production; expression of value = 1,500.

Value produced by annual labour (v + s) = 3,000.

Total value of product (c + v + s) = 9,000.

The difficulty, then, does not consist in the analysis of the value of
the social product itself. It arises in the comparison of the component
parts of the value of the social product with its material constituents.

The constant, merely re-appearing portion of value is equal to the
value of that part of this product which consists of means of production
and is incorporated in that part.

The new value-product of the year, equal to v + s, is equal to the
value of that part of this product which consists of articles of
consumption and is incorporated in it.

But with exceptions of no consequence here, means of production
and articles of consumption are wholly different kinds of commodities,
products of entirely different bodily or use-forms, and, therefore,
products of wholly different classes of concrete labour. The labour which
employs machinery in the production of means of subsistence is vastly
different from the labour which makes machinery. The entire aggregate
annual working-day, whose value-expression is 3,000, seems spent in
the production of articles of consumption equal to 3,000, in which no
constant portion of value re-appears, since these 3,000, equal to 1,500v
+ 1,500s, resolve themselves only into variable capital-value and
surplus-value. On the other hand the constant capital-value of 6,000 re-appears
in a class of products quite different from articles of
consumption, namely in means of production, while as a matter of fact
no part of the social working-day seems spent in the production of these
new products. It seems rather that the entire working-day consists only
of classes of labour which do not result in means of production but in
articles of consumption. This mystery has already been cleared up. The
value-product of the year's labour is equal to the value of the products of
department II, to the total value of the newly produced articles of
consumption. But the value of these products is greater by two-thirds
than that portion of the annual labour which has been expended in the
sphere of production of articles of consumption (department II). Only
one-third of the annual labour has been expended in their production.
Two-thirds of this annual labour have been expended in the production
of means of production, that is to say, in department I. The value-product
created during this time in I, equal to the variable capital-value
plus surplus-value produced in I, is equal to the constant-capital-value of
II re-appearing in articles of consumption of II. Hence they may be
mutually exchanged and replaced in kind. The total value of the articles
of consumption of II is therefore equal to the sum of the new value-product
of I and II, or II(c + v + s) equal to I(v + s) + II(v + s), hence equal to the sum of the new values produced by the year's labour in the form of v plus s.

On the other hand the total value of the means of production (I) is
equal to the sum of the constant capital-value re-appearing in the form
of means of production (I) and in that of articles of consumption (II); in
other words, equal to the sum of the constant capital-value re-appearing
in the total product of society. This total value is equal in terms of value
to four-thirds of a working-day preceding the process of production of I
and two-thirds of a working-day preceding the process of production of
II, in all equal to two aggregate working-days.

The difficulty with the annual social product arises therefore from the
fact that the constant portion of value is represented by a wholly
different class of products ; means of production ; than the new value v
+ s added to this constant portion of value and represented by articles
of consumption. Thus the appearance is created, so far as value is
concerned, that two-thirds of the consumed mass of products are found
again in a new form as new product, without any labour having been
expended by society in their production. This is not so in the case of an
individual capital. Every individual capitalist employs some particular
concrete kind of labour, which transforms the means of production
peculiar to it into a product. Let for instance the capitalist be a machine-builder,
the constant capital expended during the year 6,000c, the
variable 1,500v, the surplus-value 1,500s, the product 9,000, the product, say, 18 machines of 500 each. The entire product here exists
in the same form, that of machines. (If he produces various kinds, each
kind is calculated separately.) The entire commodity-product is the result
of the labour expended during the year in machine-building; it is a
combination of the same concrete kind of labour with the same means
of production. The various portions of the value of the product therefore
present themselves in the same bodily form: 12 machines embody
6,000c, 3 machines 1,500v, 3 machines 1,500s. In the present case it is evident that the value of the 12 machines is equal to 6,000c, not because there is incorporated in these 12 machines only labour
performed previously to the manufacture of these machines and not
labour expended on building them. The value of the means of production
for 18 machines did not of itself become transformed into 12 machines
but the value of these 12 machines (consisting itself of 4,000c + 1,000v + 1,000s) is equal to the total value of the constant capital contained in the 18 machines. The machine-manufacturer must therefore sell 12 of
the 18 machines in order to replace his expended constant capital,
which he requires for the reproduction of 18 new machines. On the
contrary, the thing would be inexplicable if in spite of the fact that the
labour expended was employed solely in the manufacture of machines,
the result were to be: On the one hand 6 machines equal to 1,500v +
1,500s, on the other iron, copper, screws, belts, etc., of a value amounting
to 6,000c, i.e., the means of production of the machines in their
bodily form, which, as we know, the individual machine-building
capitalist does not produce himself but must replace by way of the
process of circulation. And yet it seems at first glance that the
reproduction of the annual product of society takes place in this absurd
way.

The product of an individual capital, i.e., of every fraction of the
social capital endowed with a life of its own and functioning
independently, has a bodily form of one kind or another. The only
condition is that this product must really have a use-form, a use-value,
which gives it the imprint of a member of the world of commodities
capable of circulation. It is immaterial and accidental whether or not it
can re-enter as a means of production into the same process of
production from which it emerged as a product; in other words, whether
the portion of its value representing the constant part of the capital has a
bodily form in which it can actually function again as constant capital. If
not, this portion of the value of the product is reconverted into the form
of its material elements of production by means of sale and purchase
and thus the constant capital is reproduced in the bodily form capable of
functioning.

It is different with the product of the aggregate social capital. All the
material elements of reproduction must in their bodily form constitute
parts of this product. The consumed constant part of capital can be
replaced by the aggregate production only to the extent that the entire
constant part of the capital reappearing in the product re-appears in the
bodily form of new means of production which can really function as
constant capital. Hence, simple reproduction being assumed, the value
of that portion of the product which consists of means of production
must be equal to the constant portion of the value of social capital.

Furthermore: Considered individually, the capitalist produces in the
value of his product by means of the newly added labour only his
variable capital plus surplus-value, while the constant part of the value
is transferred to the product owing to the concrete character of the newly
added labour.

Considered socially that portion of the social working-day which
produces means of production, hence adding new value to them as well
as transferring to them the value of the means of production consumed
in their manufacture, creates nothing but new constant capital intended
to replace that consumed in the shape of old means of production in
both departments I and II. It creates only product intended for productive
consumption. The entire value of this product, then, is only value which
can function anew as constant capital, which can only buy back
constant capital in its bodily form, and which, for this reason, resolves
itself, considered socially, neither into variable capital nor surplus-value.
On the other hand that part of the social working-day which produces
articles of consumption does not create any portion of the social
replacement capital. It creates only products intended, in their bodily
form, to realise the value of the variable capital and surplus-value of I
and II.

Speaking of the point of view of society, and therefore considering the
aggregate product of society, which comprises both the reproduction of
social capital and individual consumption, we must not lapse into the
manner copied by Proudhon from bourgeois economy and look upon this
matter as though a society with a capitalist mode of production, if
viewed en bloc, as a totality, would lose this its specific historical and
economic character. No, on the contrary. We have, in that case, to deal
with the aggregate capitalist. The aggregate capital appears as the
capital stock of all individual capitalists combined. This joint-stock
company has in common with many other stock companies that
everyone knows what he puts in, but not what he will get out of it.