II. Costs of Storage

Costs of circulation, which originate in a mere change of form of value,
in circulation, ideally considered, do not enter into the value of commodities.
The parts of capital expended as such costs are merely deductions from
the productively expended capital so far as the capitalist is concerned.
The costs of circulation which we shall consider now are of a different
nature. They may arise from processes of production which are only continued
in circulation, the productive character of which is hence merely concealed
by the circulation form. On the other hand they may be, from the standpoint
of society, mere costs, unproductive expenditure of living or materialised
labour, but for that very reason they become productive of value for the
individual capitalist, may constitute an addition to the selling price
of his commodities. This already follows from the fact that these costs
are different in different spheres of production, and here and there even
for different individual capitals in one and the same sphere of production.
By being added to the prices of commodities they are distributed in proportion
to the amount to be borne by each individual capitalist. But all labour
which adds value can also add surplus-value, and will always add surplus-value
under capitalist production, as the value created by labour depends on
the amount of the labour itself, whereas the surplus-value created by it
depends on the extent to which the capitalist pays for it. Consequently
costs which enhance the price of a commodity without adding to its use-value,
which therefore are to be classed as unproductive expenses so far as society
is concerned, may be a source of enrichment to the individual capitalist.
On the other hand, as this addition to the price of the commodity merely
distributes these costs of circulation equally, they do not thereby cease
to be unproductive in character. For instance insurance companies divide
the losses of individual capitalists among the capitalist class. But this
does not prevent these equalised losses from remaining losses so far as
the aggregate social capital is concerned.