1. Replacement of the Wear and Tear Portion of the Value in the Form of Money

Now, if to start with we take

I. 4,000c + 1,000v + 1,000s 

II. . . . . . . . 2,000c + 500v + 500s,

the exchange of the commodities 2,000 IIc for commodities of the same
value I (1,000v + 1,000s) would presuppose that the entire 2,000 IIc are reconverted in kind into the natural elements of the constant capital of II, produced by I. But the commodity-value of 2,000, in which the
latter exists, contains an element making good the depreciation in value
of the fixed capital, which is not to be replaced immediately in kind but
converted into money, which gradually accumulates into a sum total
until the time for the renewal of the fixed capital in its bodily form
arrives. Every year registers the demise of fixed capital which must be
replaced in this or that individual business, or in this or that branch of
industry. In the case of one and the same individual capital, this or that
portion of its fixed capital must be replaced, since its different parts have
different durabilities. On examining annual reproduction, even on a
simple scale, i.e., disregarding all accumulation, we do not begin ab
ovo. The year which we study is one in the course of many; it is not the
first year after the birth of capitalist production. The various capitals
invested in the manifold lines of production of class II therefore differ in
age. Just as people functioning in these lines of production die annually,
so a host of fixed capitals expire annually and must be renewed in kind
out of the accumulated money-fund. Therefore the exchange of 2,000 IIc
for 2,000 I(v + s) includes a conversion of 2,000 IIc from its commodity-form (articles of consumption) into natural elements which consist not
only of raw and auxiliary materials but also of natural elements of fixed
capital, such as machinery, tools, buildings, etc. The wear and tear,
which must be replaced in money in the value of 2,000 IIc, therefore by
no means corresponds to the amount of the functioning fixed capital,
since a portion of this must be replaced in kind every year. But this
assumes that the money necessary for this replacement was
accumulated in former years by the capitalists of class II. However that
very condition holds good in the same measure for the current year as
for the preceding ones.

In the exchange between I (1,000v + 1,000s) and 2,000 IIc it must be first noted that the sum of values I(v + s) does not contain any constant element of value, hence also no element of value to replace wear and tear, i.e., value that has been transmitted from the fixed component of
the constant capital to the commodities in whose bodily form v + s
exist. On the other hand this element exists in IIc, and it is precisely a
part of this value-element that owes its existence to fixed capital which
is not to be converted immediately from the money-form into its bodily
form, but has first to persist in the form of money. The exchange
between I (1,000v + 1,000s) and 2,000 IIc, therefore, at once presents the difficulty that the means of production of I, in whose bodily form the 2,000(v + s) exist, are to be exchanged to the full value of 2,000 for an equivalent in articles of consumption II, while on the other hand the
2,000 IIc of articles of consumption cannot be exchanged at their full
value for means of production I (1,000v + 1,000s) because an aliquot part of their value ; equal to the wear and tear, or the value depreciation
of the fixed capital that is to be replaced ; must first be precipitated in
the form of money that will not function any more as a medium of
circulation during the current period of annual reproduction, which alone
we are examining. But the money paying for this element of wear and
tear incorporated in the commodity-value 2,000 IIc can come only from
department I, since II cannot pay for itself but effects payment precisely
by selling its goods, and since presumably I(v + s) buys the whole of the
commodities 2,000 IIc. Hence class I must by means of this purchase
convert that wear and tear into money for II. But according to the law
previously evolved, money advanced to the circulation returns to the
capitalist producer who later on throws an equal amount of commodities
into circulation. It is evident that in buying IIc, I cannot give II
commodities worth 2,000 and a surplus amount of money on top of that
once and for all (without any return of the same by way of the operation
of exchange). Otherwise I would buy the commodity mass II above its
value. If II actually exchanges its 2,000c for I (1,000v + 1,000s), it has no further claims on I, and the money circulating in this exchange returns to either I or II, depending on which of them threw it into
circulation, i.e., which of them acted first as buyer. At the same time II
would have reconverted the entire value of its commodity-capital into the
bodily form of means of production, while our assumption is that after its
sale it would not reconvert an aliquot portion of it during the current
period of annual reproduction from money into the bodily form of fixed
components of its constant capital. A money balance in favour of II could
arise only if it sold 2,000 worth to I and bought less than 2,000 from I,
say only 1,800. In that case I would have to make good the debit
balance by 200 in money, which would not flow back to it, because it
would not have withdrawn from circulation the money it had advanced
to it by throwing into it commodities equal to 200. In such an event we
would have a money-fund for II, placed to the credit of the wear and tear
of its fixed capital. But then we would have an over-production of means
of production in the amount of 200 on the other side, the side of I, and
the basis of our scheme would be destroyed, namely reproduction on the
same scale, where complete proportionality between the various systems
of production is assumed. We would only have done away with one
difficulty in order to create another one much worse.

As this problem offers peculiar difficulties and has hitherto not been
treated at all by the political economists, we shall examine seriatim all
possible (at least seemingly possible) solutions, or rather formulations of
the problem.

In the first place, we have just assumed that II sells commodities of
the value of 2,000 to I, but buys from it only 1,800 worth. The
commodity-value 2,000 IIc contains 200 for replacement of wear and
tear, which must be stored up in the form of money. The value of 2,000
IIc would thus be divided into 1,800, to be exchanged for means of
production I, and 200, to replace wear and tear, which are to be kept in
the form of money (after the sale of the 2,000c to I). Expressed in terms
of value, 2,000 IIc equals 1,800c + 200c(d), this d standing for déchet.
[Wear and tear. ; Ed.]

We would then have to study

Exchange I. 1,000v + 1,000s

II. 1,800c + 200c(d).

I buys with &pound;1,000, which has gone to the labourers in wages for
their labour-power, 1,000 IIc of articles of consumption. II buys with the
same &pound;1,000 means of production 1,000 Iv. Capitalists I thus recover
their variable capital in the form of money and can employ it next year in
the purchase of labour power to the same amount, i.e., they can replace
the variable portion of their productive capital in kind.

Furthermore, II buys with advanced &pound;400 means of production Is,
and Is buys with the same &pound;400 articles of consumption IIc. The &pound;400 advanced to the circulation by the capitalists of II have thus returned to them, but only as an equivalent for sold commodities. I now buys
articles of consumption for advanced &pound;400; II buys from I &pound;400 worth
of means of production, whereupon these &pound;400 flow back to I. So far,
then, the account is as follows:

I throws into circulation l,000v + 800s in commodities; it furthermore throws into circulation, in money, &pound;1,000 in wages and &pound;400 for exchange with II. After the exchange has been made, I has 1,000v in
money, 800s exchanged for 800 IIc (articles of consumption) and &pound;400 in money.

II throws into circulation 1,800c in commodities (articles of
consumption) and &pound;400 in money. On the completion of the exchange it
has 1,800 in commodities I (means of production) and &pound;400 in money.

There still remain, on the side of I, 200s (in means of production)
and, on the side of II, 200c(d) (in articles of consumption).

According to our assumption I buys with &pound;200 the articles of
consumption c (d) of the value of 200. But II holds on to these &pound;200
since 200 c (d) represent wear and tear, and are not to be immediately
reconverted into means of production. Therefore 200 Is cannot be sold.
One-fifth of the surplus-value I to be replaced cannot be realised, or
converted, from its bodily form of means of production into that of
articles of consumption.

This not only contradicts our assumption of reproduction on a simple
scale; it is by itself not a hypothesis which would explain the
transformation of 200c(d) into money. It means rather that it cannot be
explained. Since it cannot be demonstrated in what manner 200c(d) can
be converted into money, it is assumed that I is obliging enough to do
the conversion just because it is not able to convert its own remainder of
200s into money. To conceive this as a normal operation of the
exchange mechanism is tantamount to the notion that &pound;200 fall every
year from the clouds in order regularly to convert 200c(d) into money.

But the absurdity of such a hypothesis does not strike one at once if
Is, instead of appearing, as it does in this case, in its primitive mode of
existence ; namely as a component part of the value of means of
production, hence as a component part of the value of commodities
which their capitalist producers must convert into money by sale ; 
appears in the hands of the partners of the capitalists, for instance as
ground-rent in the hands of landowners or as interest in the bands of
moneylenders. But if that portion of the surplus-value of commodities
which the industrial capitalist has to yield as ground-rent or interest to
other co-owners of the surplus-value cannot be realised for a long time
by the sale of the commodities, then there is also an end to the payment
of rent and interest, and the landowners or recipients of interest cannot
therefore serve as dei ex machina to convert at pleasure definite portions
of the annual reproduction into money by spending rent and interest.
The same is true of the expenditures of all so-called unproductive
labourers ; government officials, physicians, lawyers, etc., and others
who as members of the "general public" "serve" the political economists by explaining what they left unexplained.

Nor does it improve matters if instead of direct exchange between I
and II ; between the two major departments of capitalist producers ; the
merchant is drawn in as mediator and helps to overcome all difficulties
with his "money." In the present case for instance 200 Is must be definitively disposed of to the industrial capitalists of II. It may pass
through the hands of a number of merchants, but the last of them will
find himself, according to the hypothesis, in the same predicament, vis-
à-vis II, in which the capitalist producers of I were at the outset, i.e.,
they cannot sell the 200 Is to II. And this stalled purchase sum cannot
renew the same process with I.

We see here that, aside from our real purpose, it is absolutely
necessary to view the process of reproduction in its basic form ; in
which obscuring minor circumstances have been eliminated ; in order to
get rid of the false subterfuges which furnish the semblance of
"scientific" analysis when the process of social reproduction is
immediately made the subject of the analysis in its complicated concrete
form.

The law that when reproduction proceeds normally (whether it be on
a simple or on an extended scale) the money advanced by the capitalist
producer to the circulation must return to its point of departure (whether
the money is his own or borrowed) excludes once and for all the
hypothesis that 200 IIc(d) is converted into money by means of money
advanced by I.