II. The Two Departments of Social Production

The total product, and therefore the total production, of society may
be divided into two major departments:

I. Means of Production, commodities having a form in which they must, or at least may, pass into productive consumption.

II. Articles of Consumption, commodities having a form in which they pass into the individual consumption of the capitalist and the working-class.

All the various branches of production pertaining to each of these two
departments form one single great branch of production, that of the
means of production in the one case, and that of articles of consumption
in the other. The aggregate capital employed in each of these two
branches of production constitutes a separate large department of the
social capital.

In each department the capital consists of two parts:

1) Variable Capital. This capital, so far as its value is concerned, is equal to the value of the social labour-power employed in this branch of production; in other words, it is equal to the sum of the wages paid for
this labour-power. So far as its substance is concerned, it consists of the
labour-power in action, i.e., of the living labour set in motion by this
capital-value.

2) Constant Capital. This is the value of all the means of production employed for productive purposes in this branch. These, again, are
divided into fixed capital, such as machines, instruments of labour,
buildings, labouring animals, etc., and circulating constant capital, such
as materials of production: raw and auxiliary materials, semi-finished
products, etc.

The value of the total annual product created with the aid of this
capital in each of the two departments consists of one portion which
represents the constant capital c consumed in the process of production
and only transferred to the product in accordance with its value, and of
another portion added by the entire labour of the year. This latter portion
is divided in turn into the replacement of the advanced variable capital v
and the excess over and above it, which forms the surplus-value s. And
just as the value of every individual commodity, that of the entire annual
product of each department consists of c + v + s.

Portion c of the value, representing the constant capital consumed in
production, does not coincide with the value of the constant capital
employed in production. True, the materials of production are entirely
consumed and their values completely transferred to the product. But
only a portion of the employed fixed capital is wholly consumed and its
value thus transferred to the product. Another part of the fixed capital,
such as machines, buildings, etc., continues to exist and function the
same as before, though depreciated to the extent of the annual wear and
tear. This persistent portion of the fixed capital does not exist for us,
when we consider the value of the product. It is a portion of the capital-value,
which exists independently and alongside of this newly produced
commodity-value. This was shown previously in the analysis of the value
of the product of individual capital (Vol. I, Ch. VIII.). However, for the
present we must leave aside the method of analysis employed there. We
saw in the study of the value of the product of individual capital that the
value of which the fixed capital was shorn through wear and tear is
transferred to the product created during the time of wear, irrespective of
whether or not any portion of this fixed capital is replaced in kind during
this time out of the value thus transferred. At this point in the study of
the total social product and of its value, however, we are compelled, at
least for the present, to leave out of account that portion of value which
is transferred from the fixed capital to the annual product by wear and
tear, unless fixed capital is replaced in kind during the year. In one of
the following sections of this chapter we shall discuss this point in
particular.

We shall base our study of simple reproduction on the following
scheme, in which c stands for constant capital, v for variable capital,
and s for surplus-value, assuming the rate of surplus-value s/v to be 100
per cent. The figures may indicate millions of marks, francs, or pounds
sterling.

I. Production of Means of Production:

Capital. . . . . . . . . . . . . 4,000c + 1,000v = 5,000

Commodity-Product . . . 4,000c + 1,000v, + 1,000s = 6,000,

existing in means of production.

II. Production of Articles of Consumption:

Capital . . . . . . . . . . . 2,000c + 500v = 2,500

Commodity-Product . . 2,000c + 500v + 500s = 3,000,

 existing in articles of consumption.

Recapitulation: Total annual commodity-product:

I. 4,000c + 1,000v + 1,000s = 6,000 means of production

II. 2,000c + 500v + 500s = 3,000 articles of consumption.

Total value 9,000, exclusive of the fixed capital persisting in its
natural form, according to our assumption.

If we were now to examine the transformations necessary on the
basis of simple reproduction, where the entire surplus-value is
unproductively consumed, and leave aside for the present the money-circulation
that brings them about, we should obtain at the outset three
great points of support.

1) The 500v, representing wages of the labourers, and 500s,
representing surplus-value of the capitalists, in department II, must be
spent for articles of consumption. But their value exists in articles of
consumption worth 1,000, held by the capitalists of department II,
which replace the advanced 500v and represent the 500s. Consequently the wages and surplus-value of department II are exchanged within this
department for products of this same department. Thereby articles of
consumption to the amount of (500v + 500s) II = 1,000, drop out of the total product.

2) The 1,000v plus 1,000s of department I must likewise be spent for articles of consumption; in other words, for products of department II.
Hence they must be exchanged for the remainder of this product equal
to the constant capital part, 2,000c. Department II receives in return an
equal quantity of means of production, the product of I, in which the
value of 1,000v + 1,000s of I is incorporated. Thereby 2,000 IIc and (1,000v +1,000s) I drop out of the calculation.

3) There still remain 4,000 Ic. These consist of means of production
which can be used only in department I to replace its consumed
constant capital, and are therefore disposed of by mutual exchange
between the individual capitalists of I, just as the (500v + 500s) II by an exchange between the labourers and capitalists, or between the individual capitalists of II.

Let this serve for the moment to facilitate the understanding of what
follows.