(b) The Commodity-Supply Proper

We have already seen that under capitalist production the product assumes
the general form of a commodity, and the more so the more that production
grows in size and depth. Consequently, even if production retains the same
volume, the far greater part of the products exists in the shape of commodities,
compared with either the former modes of production or the capitalist mode
of production at a less developed stage. And every commodity ; therefore,
also every commodity-capital, which is only commodities, but commodities
serving as the form of existence of capital-value ; constitutes an element
of the commodity-supply, unless it passes immediately from its sphere of
production into productive or individual consumption, that is, does not
lie in the market in the interval. If the volume of production remains
the same, the commodity-supply (i.e., this isolation and fixation of the
commodity-form of the product) grows therefore of itself concomitantly
with capitalist production. We have seen above that this is merely a change
of form of the supply, that is to say, the supply in the form of commodities
increases on the one hand because on the other the supply in the form intended
directly for production or consumption decreases. It is merely a changed
social form of the supply. If at the same time it is not only the relative
magnitude of the commodity-supply compared with the aggregate social product
that increases but also its absolute magnitude, that is so because the
mass of the aggregate product grows with the growth of capitalist production.

With the development of capitalist production, the scale of production
is determined less and less by the direct demand for the product and more
and more by the amount of capital available in the hands of the individual
capitalist, by the urge of self-expansion inherent in his capital and by
the need of continuity and expansion of the process of production. Thus
in each particular branch of production there is a necessary increase in
the mass of products available in the market in the shape of commodities,
i.e., in search of buyers. The amount of capital fixed for a shorter or
longer period in the form of commodity-capital grows. Hence the commodity-supply
also grows.

Finally the majority of the members of society are transformed
into wage-labourers, into people who live from hand to mouth, who receive
their wages weekly and spend them daily, who therefore must have their
means of subsistence made available to them in the shape of a supply. Although
the separate elements of this supply may be in continuous flow, a part
of them must always stagnate in order that the supply as a whole may remain
in a state of flux.

All these characteristics have their origin in the form of production
and in the incident change of form which the product must undergo in the
process of circulation.

Whatever may be the social form of the products-supply, its preservation
requires outlays for buildings, vessels, etc., which are facilities for
storing the product; also for means of production and labour, more or less
of which must be expended, according to the nature of the product, in order
to combat injurious influences. The more concentrated socially the supply
is, the smaller relatively are the costs. These outlays always constitute
a part of the social labour, in either materialised or living form ; hence
in the capitalist form outlays of capital ; which do not enter into the
formation of the product itself and thus are deductions from the product.
They are necessary, these unproductive expenses of social wealth. They
are the costs of preserving the social product regardless of whether its
existence as an element of the commodity-supply stems merely from the social
form of production, hence from the commodity-form and its necessary change
of form, or whether we regard the commodity-supply merely as a special
form of the supply of products, which is common to all societies, although
not in the form of a commodity-supply that form of products-supply
belonging in the process of circulation.

It may now be asked to what extent these costs enhance the value
of commodities.

If the capitalist has converted the capital advanced by him in the form of means of production and labour-power into a product, into a definite quantity of commodities ready for sale, and these commodities remain in stock unsold, then we have a case of not only the stagnation of the process of self-expansion of his capital-value during this period. The costs of preserving this supply in buildings, of additional labour,
etc., mean a positive loss. The buyer he would ultimately find would laugh
in his face if he were to say to him: "I could not sell my goods for six
months, and their preservation during that period did not only keep so
and so much of my capital idle, but also cost me so and so much extra expense."
"Tant pis pour vous!" the buyer would say. "Right here alongside of you is another seller whose wares were completed only the day before
yesterday. Your articles are shop-worn and probably more or less damaged
by the ravages of time. Therefore you will have to sell cheaper than your
competitor."

The conditions under which a commodity exists are not in the
least affected by whether its producer is the real producer or a capitalist
producer, hence actually only a representative of the real producer. He
has to turn his product into money. The expenses incurred by him because
of the fixation of the product in the form of commodities are a part of
his individual speculations with which the buyer of the commodities has
no concern. The latter does not pay him for the time of circulation of
his commodities. Even when the capitalist keeps his goods intentionally
off the market, in times of an actual or anticipated revolution of values,
it depends on the advent of this revolution of values, on the correctness
or incorrectness of his speculation, whether he will recover his additional
costs or not. But the revolution in values does not ensue in consequence
of his additional costs. Hence in so far as the formation of a supply entails
a stagnation of circulation, the expense incurred thereby does not add
to the value of the commodities. On the other hand there cannot be any
supply without a stay in the sphere of circulation, without capital staying
for a longer or shorter time in its commodity-form; hence no supply without
stagnation of circulation, just as no money can circulate without the formation
of a money-reserve. Hence no commodity circulation without commodity-supply.
If the capitalist does not come face to face with this necessity in C' ; M',
he will encounter it in M ; C; if not with regard to his own commodity-capital,
then with regard to that of other capitalists, who produce means of production
for him and means of subsistence for his labourers.

Whether the formation of a supply is voluntary or involuntary,
that is to say, whether the commodity-producer keeps a supply intentionally
or whether his products form a supply in consequence of the sales resistance
offered by the conditions of the process of circulation itself cannot effect
the matter essentially, it would seem. But for the solution of this problem
it is useful to know what distinguishes voluntary from involuntary supply
formation. Involuntary formation arises from, or is identical with, a stagnation
of the circulation which is independent of the knowledge of the commodity-producer
and thwarts his will. And what characterises the voluntary formation of
a supply? In both instances the seller seeks to get rid of his commodity
as fast as ever. He always offers his product for sale as a commodity.
If he were to withdraw it from sale, it would be only a potential (ἐνεργείᾳ), not
an actual (ένέγεία) element of the commodity-supply. To him the commodity as such is as much a depository of exchange-value as ever and as such can act only by and after stripping off its commodity-form and assuming the money-form.

The commodity-supply must be of a certain volume in order to satisfy the
demand during a given period. A continual extension of the circle of buyers
is counted upon. For instance, in order to last for one day, a part of
the commodities in the market must constantly remain in the commodity-form
while the remainder is fluent, turns into money. True, the part which stagnates
while the rest is fluent decreases steadily, just as the size of the supply
itself decreases until it is all sold. The stagnation of commodities thus
counts as a requisite condition of their sale. The volume must furthermore
be larger than the average sale or the average demand. Otherwise the excess
over these averages could not be satisfied. On the other hand the supply
must constantly be renewed, because it is constantly being drawn on. This
renewal cannot come from anywhere in the last instance except from production,
from a supply of commodities. It is immaterial whether this comes from
abroad or not. The renewal depends on the periods required by the commodities
for their reproduction. The commodity-supply must last the whole time. The
fact that it does not remain in the hands of the original producer but
passes through various reservoirs, from the wholesaler to the retailer,
changes merely the appearance and not the nature of the thing. From the
point of view of society, a part of the capital retains in both instances
the form of a commodity-supply until the commodities enter productive or
individual consumption. The producer tries to keep a stock corresponding
to his average demand in order not to depend directly on production and
to ensure for himself a steady clientele. Purchase periods corresponding
to the periods of production are formed and the commodities constitute
supplies for longer or shorter time, until they can be replaced by new
commodities of the same kind. Constancy and continuity of the process of
circulation, and therefore of the process of reproduction, which includes
the process of circulation, are safeguarded only by the formation of such
supplies.

It must be remembered that C' ; M' may have been transacted for
the producer of C, even if C is still in the market. If the producer were
to keep his own commodities in stock until they are sold to the ultimate
consumer, he would have to set two capitals in motion, one as the producer
of the commodities and one as a merchant. As far as the commodity itself
is concerned, whether we look upon it as an individual commodity or as
a component part of social capital, it is immaterial whether the costs
of forming the supply must be borne by its producer or by a series of merchants
from A to Z.

Since the commodity-supply is nothing but the commodity-form of
the product which at a particular level of social production would exist
either as a productive supply (latent production fund) or as a consumption-fund
(reserve of means of consumption) if it did not exist as a commodity-supply,
the expenses required for its preservation, that is, the costs of supply
formation ; i.e., materialised or living labour spent for this purpose
; are merely expenses incurred for maintaining either the social fund
for production or the social fund for consumption. The increase in the
value of commodities caused by them distributes these costs simply pro
rata over the different commodities, since the costs differ with different
kinds of commodities. And the costs of supply formation are as much as
ever deductions from the social wealth, although they constitute one of
the conditions of its existence.

Only to the extent that the commodity-supply is a premise of commodity
circulation and is itself a form necessarily arising in commodity circulation,
only in so far as this apparent stagnation is therefore a form of the movement
itself, just as the formation of a money-reserve is a premise of money
circulation ; only to that extent is such stagnation normal. But as soon
as the commodities lying in the reservoirs of circulation do not make room
for the swiftly succeeding wave of production, so that the reservoirs become
over-stocked, the commodity-supply expands in consequence of the stagnation
in circulation just as the hoards increase when money-circulation is clogged.
It does not make any difference whether this jam occurs in the warehouses
of the industrial capitalist or in the storerooms of the merchant. The
commodity-supply is in that case not a prerequisite of uninterrupted sale,
but a consequence of the impossibility of selling the goods. The costs
are the same, but since they now arise purely out of the form, that is
to say, out of the necessity of transforming the commodities into money
and out of the difficulty of going through this metamorphosis, they do
not enter into the values of the commodities but constitute deductions,
losses of value in the realisation of the value. Since the normal and abnormal
forms of the supply do not differ in form and both clog circulation, these
phenomena may be confused and deceive the agent of production himself so
much the more since for the producer the process of circulation of his
capital may continue while that of his commodities which have changed hands
and now belong to merchants may be arrested. If production and consumption
swell, other things being equal, then the commodity-supply swells likewise.
It is renewed and absorbed just as fast, but its size is greater. Hence
the bulging size of the commodity-supply, for which stagnant circulation
is responsible, may be mistaken for a symptom of the expansion of the process
of reproduction, especially when the development of the credit-system makes
it possible to wrap the real movement in mystery.

The costs of supply formation consist: 1) of a quantitative diminution
of the mass of the products (for instance in the case of a flour supply;
2) of a deterioration of quality; 3) of the materialised and living labour
required for the preservation of the supply.