II. Components, Replacements, Repairs and Accumulation of Fixed Capital

In any investment of capital the separate elements of the fixed capital
have different lifetimes, and therefore different turnover times. In a
railway, for instance, the rails, sleepers, earthworks, terminals, bridges,
tunnels, locomotives, and carriages have different functional periods and
times of reproduction, hence the capital advanced for them has different
times of turnover. For a great number of years, buildings, platforms, water
tanks, viaducts, tunnels, cuttings, dams, in short everything called "works
of art" in English railroading, do not require any renewal. The things
which wear out most are the tracks and rolling stock.

Originally in the construction of modern railways it was the prevailing
opinion, nursed by the most prominent practical engineers, that a railway
would last a century and that the wear and tear of the rails was so imperceptible
that it could be ignored for all financial and other practical purposes;
100 to 150 years was supposed to be the life of good rails. But it was
soon found that the life of a rail, which naturally depends on the speed
of the locomotives, the weight and number of trains, the diameter of the
rails, and on a multitude of other attendant circumstances, did not exceed
an average of 20 years. In some railway terminals, great traffic centres,
the rails even wear out every year. About 1867 began the introduction of
steel rails, which cost about twice as much as iron rails but which last
more than twice as long. The life-time of wooden sleepers was from 12 to
15 years. It was also ascertained with regard to the rolling stock that
freight cars wear out faster than passenger cars. The life of a locomotive
was estimated in 1867 to be about 10 to 12 years.

The wear and tear is first of all a result of use. As a rule "the
wear of the rails is proportionate to the number of trains." (R.C., No.
17645.)[22] With increased speed the wear and tear of a railway increased in a higher ratio than the square of the speed; that
is to say, if you doubled the speed of the engine, you more than quadrupled
the cost of wear and tear of the road. (R.C., No. 17046.)

Wear and tear is furthermore caused by the action of natural forces.
For instance sleepers suffer not only from actual wear but also from rot.

"The cost of maintaining the road does not depend so much upon the wear and tear of the traffic passing over it, as upon the quality of wood, iron,
bricks and mortars exposed to the atmosphere. A month of severe water would
do not more damage to the road of a railway than a year's traffic." (R.
P. Williams, "On the Maintenance of Permanent Way," Paper read at the Institute of Civil Engineers, Autumn, 1867. [R. P. Williams's paper was published in Money Market Review of December 2, 1867. ; Ed.])

Finally, here as everywhere else in modern industry, the moral
depreciation plays a role. After the lapse of ten years, one can generally
buy the same number of cars and locomotives for &pound;30,000 that would
previously have cost &pound;40,000. Depreciation in the rolling stock must
be set at 25 per cent of the market price even when there is no depreciation
whatever in its use-values. (Lardner, Railway Economy.)

"Tube bridges will not be replaced in their present form."

(Because now there are better forms for such bridges.)

"Ordinary repairs, taking away gradually, and replacing are not practicable." (W. P. Adams, Roads and Rails, London, 1862.)

The instruments of labour are largely modified all the time by the progress of industry. Hence they are not replaced in their original, but in their modified form. On the one hand the mass of the fixed capital invested in a certain bodily form and endowed in that form with a certain average life constitutes one reason for the only gradual
pace of the introduction of new machinery, etc., and therefore an obstacle
to the rapid general introduction of improved instruments of labour. On
the other hand competition compels the replacement of the old instruments
of labour by new ones before the expiration of their natural life, especially
when decisive changes occur. Such premature renewals of factory equipment
on a rather large social scale are mainly enforced by catastrophes or crises.

By wear and tear (moral depreciation excepted) is meant that part
of value which the fixed capital, on being used, gradually transmits to
the product, in proportion to its average loss of use-value.

This wear and tear takes place partly in such a way that the fixed
capital has a certain average durability. It is advanced for this entire
period in one sum. After the termination of this period it must be totally
replaced. So far as living instruments of labour are concerned, for instance
horses, their reproduction is timed by nature itself. Their average lifetime
as instruments of labour is determined by laws of nature. As soon as this
term has expired they must be replaced by new ones. A horse cannot be replaced
piecemeal; it must be replaced by another horse.

Other elements of fixed capital permit of a periodical or partial
renewal. In this instance partial or periodical replacement must be distinguished
from gradual extension of the business.

The fixed capital consists in part of homogeneous constituents
which do not however last the same length of time but are renewed piecemeal
at various intervals. This is true for instance of the rails and railway
stations, which must be replaced more often than those of the remainder
of the trackage. It also applies to the sleepers, which on the Belgian
railways had to be renewed in the forties at the rate of 8 per cent annually,
according to Lardner, so that all the sleepers were renewed in the course
of 12&frac12; years. Hence we have here the following situation: a certain
sum is advanced for a certain kind of fixed capital for say ten years.
This expenditure is made at one time. But a definite part of this fixed
capital, the value of which has entered into the value of the product and
been converted with it into money, is replaced in kind every year, while
the remainder continues to exist in its original body form. It is this
advance in one sum and the only partial reproduction in bodily form which
distinguish this capital, as fixed, from circulating capital.

Other pieces of the fixed capital consist of heterogeneous components,
which wear out in unequal periods of time and must so be replaced. This
applies particularly to machines. What we have just said concerning the
different durabilities of different constituent parts of a fixed capital
applies in this case to the durability of different component parts of
any machine figuring as a piece of this fixed capital.

With regard to the gradual extension of the business in the course
of the partial renewal, we make the following remarks: Although, as we
have seen, the fixed capital continues to perform its functions in the
process of production in kind, a part of its value, proportionate to the
average wear and tear, has circulated with the product, has been converted
into money, and forms an element in the money reserve fund intended for
the replacement of the capital pending its reproduction in kind. This part
of the value of the fixed capital transformed into money may serve to extend
the business or to make improvements in the machinery which will increase
the efficiency of the latter. Thus reproduction takes place in larger or
smaller periods of time, and this is, from the standpoint of society, reproduction
on an enlarged scale ; extensive if the means of production is extended;
intensive if the means of production is made more effective. This reproduction
on an extended scale does not result from accumulation ; transformation
of surplus-value into capital ; but from the reconversion of the value
which has branched off, detached itself in the form of money from the body
of the fixed capital into new additional or at least more effective fixed
capital of the same kind. Of course it depends partly on the specific nature
of the business, to what extent and in what proportions it is capable of
such gradual addition, hence also in what amount a reserve fund must be
collected to be reinvested in this way, and what period of time this requires.
To what extent furthermore improvements in the details of existing machinery
can be made, depends of course on the nature of these improvements and
the construction of the machine itself. How well this point is considered
at the very outset in the construction of railways is shown by Adams:

"The whole structure should be set out on the principle which governs the beehive ; capacity for indefinite extension. Any fixed and decided symmetrical structure is to be deprecated, as needing subsequent pulling down in case
of enlargement." (p. 123.)

This depends largely on the available space. In the case of some
buildings additional storeys may be built; in the case of others lateral
extension, hence more land, is required. Within capitalist production there
is on the one side much waste of material, on the other much impracticable
lateral extension of this sort (partly to the injury of the labour-power)
in the gradual expansion of the business, because nothing is undertaken
according to a social plan, but everything depends on the infinitely different
conditions, means, etc., with which the individual capitalist operates.
This results in a great waste of the productive forces.

This piecemeal reinvestment of the money reserve fund (i.e., of
that part of the fixed capital which has been reconverted into money) is
easiest in agriculture. A field of production of a given area is here capable
of the greatest possible gradual absorption of capital. The same applies
to where there is natural reproduction as in cattle breeding.

Fixed capital entails special maintenance costs. A part of this
maintenance is provided by the labour-process itself; fixed capital spoils,
if it is not employed in the labour-process (Buch I, Kap. VI, S. 196 and
Kap. XIII, S. 423, [English edition: Ch. VIII and XV. ; Ed.] on
wear and tear of machinery when not in use). The English law therefore
explicitly treats it as waste, if rented lands are not cultivated according
to the custom of the land. (W. A. Holdsworth, Barrister at Law, The
Law of Landlord and Tenant, London, 1857, p. 96.)

This maintenance resulting from use in the labour-process is a free gift inherent in the
nature of living labour. Moreover the preservative power of labour is of
a two-fold character. On the one hand it preserves the value of the materials
of labour by transferring it to the product, on the other hand it preserves
the value of the instruments of labour without transferring this value
to the product, by preserving their use-value through their activity in
the process of production.

The fixed capital however requires also a positive expenditure
of labour for its maintenance in good repair. The machinery must be cleaned
from time to time. It is a question here of additional labour without which
the machinery becomes useless, of merely warding off the noxious influences
of the elements, which are inseparable from the process of production;
hence it is a question of keeping the machinery literally in working order.
It goes without saying that the normal durability of fixed capital is calculated
on the supposition that all the conditions which it can perform its functions
normally during that time are fulfilled, just as we assume, in placing
a man's life at 30 years on the average, that he will wash himself. It
is here not a question of replacing the labour contained in the machine,
but of constant additional labour made necessary by its use. It is not
a question of labour performed by the machine, but of labour spent on it,
of labour which it is not an agent of production but raw material. The
capital expended for this labour must be classed as circulating capital,
although it does not enter into the labour-process proper to which the
product owes its existence. This labour must be continually expended in
production, hence its value must be continually replaced by that of the
product. The capital invested in it belongs in that part of circulating
capital which has to cover the unproductive costs and is to be distributed
over the produced values according to an annual average calculation. We
have seen [Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, p. 426, Note 1. ; Ed.] that in industry proper this labour of cleaning is performed by the workingmen gratis, during the rest periods, and for that very reason often also during
the process of production itself, and most accidents can be traced to this
source. This labour does not figure in the price of the product. As far
as that goes the consumer receives it gratis. On the other hand the capitalist
thus does not pay the maintenance costs of the machine. The labourer pays
in persona, and this is one of the mysteries of the self-preservation
of capital, which in point of fact constitute a legal claim by the labourer
on the machinery, on the strength of which he is a co-owner of the machine
even from the standpoint of bourgeois law. However, in various branches
of production, in which the machinery must be removed from the process
of production for the purpose of cleaning and where therefore the cleaning
cannot be performed in between, as for instance in the case of locomotives,
this maintenance work counts as current expenses and is therefore an element
of circulating capital. For instance a goods engine should not run more
than 3 days without being kept one day in the shed. If you attempt
to wash out the boiler before it has cooled down that is very injurious.
(R.C., No. 17823.)

The actual repairs or patchwork require expenditures of capital
and labour which are not contained in the originally advanced capital and
cannot therefore be replaced and covered, at least not always, by the gradual
replacement of the value of the fixed capital. For instance if the value
of the fixed capital is &pound;10,000 and its total life of 10 years, then
these &pound;10,000, having been entirely converted into money after the
lapse of ten years, will replace only the value of the capital originally
invested, but they do not replace the capital, or labour, added in the
meantime for repairs. This is an additional component part of the value,
which is not advanced all at one time but whenever a need for it arises,
and the various times for advancing it are in the very nature of things
accidental. All fixed capital demands such subsequent, dosed out, additional
outlay of capital for instruments of labour and labour-power.

The damage which separate parts of the machinery, etc., may incur
is naturally accidental and so are therefore the repairs involved. Nevertheless
two kinds of repairs are to be distinguished in the general mass, which
are of a more or less fixed character and fall within various periods of
the life of fixed capital. These are the ailments of childhood and the
far more numerous ailments of the post-middle durability period. A machine
for instance may be commissioned in ever so perfect a condition, still
actual use will reveal shortcomings which must be remedied by subsequent
labour. On the other hand the more a machine passes beyond the mid-durability
point, the more therefore the normal wear and tear has accumulated and
the more the material of which it consists has been worn out and become
decrepit, the more numerous and considerable will be the repairs required
to keep it going for the remainder of its average durability. It is the
same with an old man, who incurs more medical expenses to keep from dying
prematurely than a young and strong man. So in spite of its accidental
character repair work is unevenly distributed over the various periods
of life of fixed capital.

From the foregoing and from the generally accidental character
of repair work on machines its follows:

In one respect the actual expenditure of labour-power and instruments
of labour on repairs is accidental, like the circumstances which necessitate
these repairs; the amount of the repairs needed is unevenly distributed
over the different periods of fixed capital's life. In other respects it
is taken for granted in estimating the average life of fixed capital that
it is constantly kept in good working order, partly by cleaning (including
the cleaning of the premises), partly by repairs as often as required.
The transfer of value through wear and tear of fixed capital is calculated
on its average life, but this average life itself is based on the assumption
that the additional capital required for maintenance purposes is continually
advanced.

But then it is also evident that the value added by this extra
expenditure of capital and labour cannot enter into the price of the commodities
concerned at the same time as it is incurred. For example, a manufacturer
of yarn cannot sell his yarn dearer this week than last, merely because
one of his wheels broke or a belt tore this week. The general costs of
spinning have not been changed in any way by this accident in some individual
factory. Here, as in all determinations of value, the average decides.
Experience shows the average occurrence of such accidents and the average
volume of the maintenance and repair work necessary during the average
life of the fixed capital invested in a given branch of business. This
average expense is distributed over the average life and added to the price
of the product in corresponding aliquot parts; hence it is replaced by
means of its sale.

The additional capital which is thus replaced belongs to the circulating
capital, although the manner of its expenditure is irregular. As it is
of paramount importance to remedy every damage to machinery immediately,
every comparatively large factory employs in addition to the regular factory
force special personnel ; engineers, carpenters, mechanics, locksmiths,
etc. Their wages are a part of the variable capital and the value of their
labour is distributed over the product. On the other hand the expenses
for means of production are calculated on the basis of the above-mentioned
average, according to which they form continually a part of the value of
the product, although they are actually advanced in irregular periods and
therefore enter into the product or the fixed capital in irregular periods.
This capital, expended in repairs properly so called, is in many respects
a capital sui generis, which can be classed neither as circulating nor
as fixed capital, but belongs with greater justification to the former,
since it figures among the running expenses.

The manner of book-keeping does not of course change in any way
the actual state of affairs booked. But it is important to note that customarily
many lines of business figure the costs of repairs together with the actual
wear and tear of the fixed capital in the following manner: Let the advanced
fixed capital be &pound;10,000 and its durability 15 years. The annual
wear and tear is then &pound;666⅔. But the depreciation is calculated
on a durability of only ten years; in other words, &pound;1,000 are added
annually to the price of the produced commodities for wear and tear of
the fixed capital, instead of &pound;666⅔. Thus &pound;333⅓ are reserved for repairs, etc. (The figures 10 and 15 are chosen only by way of illustration.)
This amount is spent on an average for repairs, so that the fixed capital
may last 15 years. Such a calculation naturally does not prevent the fixed
capital and the additional capital spent on repairs from belonging to different
categories. On the strength of this mode of calculation it was assumed
for instance that the lowest cost estimate for the maintenance and replacement
of steamships was 15 per cent annually the time of reproduction being therefore
6⅔ years. In the sixties, the English government indemnified the Peninsular
and Oriental Co. at the annual rate of 16 percent, corresponding to a reproduction
time of 6&frac14; years. On railways the average life of a locomotive is 10
years, but the depreciation, counting in repairs is taken as 12&frac12; per
cent, which brings down its durability to 8 years. In the case of passenger
and goods cars, the estimate is 9 per cent, or a durability of 11 1/9 years.

Legislation has everywhere drawn a distinction, in leases of houses
and other objects which represent fixed capital to their owners and are
leased as such, between normal depreciation, which is the result of time,
the action of the elements, and normal wear on the one hand and on the
other those occasional repairs which are required from time to time for
maintenance during the normal life of the house and during its normal use.
As a rule, the former are borne by the owner, the latter by the tenant.
Repairs are further divided into ordinary and substantial ones. The last-named
are partly a renewal of the fixed capital in its bodily form, and they
fall likewise on the shoulders of the owner, unless the lease explicitly
states the contrary. Take for instance the English law:

"A tenant from year to year, on the other hand, is not bound to do more than keep the premises wind and watertight, when that can be done without 'substantial' repairs; and generally to do repairs coming fairly under the head 'ordinary.' Even with respect to those parts of the premises which are the subject of 'ordinary' repairs, regard must be had to their age and general state, and condition, when he took possession, for he is not bound to replace
old and worn-out materials with new ones, nor to make good the inevitable
depreciation resulting from time and ordinary wear and tear." (Holdsworth,
Law of Landlord and Tenant, pp. 90 and 91.)

Entirely different from the replacement of wear and tear and from
the work of maintenance and repair is insurance, which relates to
destruction caused by extraordinary phenomena of nature, fire, flood, etc.
This must be made good out of the surplus-value and is a deduction from
it. Or, considered from the point of view of society as a whole, there
must be continuous over-production, that is, production on a larger scale
than is necessary for the simple replacement and reproduction of the existing
wealth, quite apart from the increase in population, so as to be in possession
of the means of production required to compensate for the extraordinary
destruction caused by accidents and natural forces.

In point of fact only the smallest part of the capital needed
for replacement consists of the money reserve fund. The most substantial
part consists in the extension of the scale of production itself, which
partly is actual expansion and partly belongs to the normal volume of production
in those branches of industry which produce the fixed capital. For instance
a machine factory must arrange things so that the factories of its customers
can annually be extended and that a number of them will always stand in
need of total or partial reproduction.

On determining the wear and tear as well as the costs of repairs,
according to the social average, great disparity necessarily appears, even
in the case of capital investments of equal size, operating otherwise under
equal conditions and in the same branch of industry. In practice a machine,
etc., lasts with one capitalist longer than the average period, while with
another it does not last so long. With the one the costs of repairs are
above, with the other below average, etc. But the addition to the price
of the commodities resulting from wear and tear and from costs of repairs
is the same and is determined by the average. The one therefore gets more
out of this additional price than he really added, the other less. This
circumstance as well as all others which result in different gains for
different capitalists in the same line of business with the same degree
of exploitation of labour-power tends to enhance the difficulty of understanding
the true nature of surplus-value.

The line between repairs proper and replacement, between costs
of maintenance and costs of renewal, is rather flexible. Hence the eternal
dispute, for instance in railroading, whether certain expenses are for
repairs or for replacement, whether they must be defrayed from current
expenditures or from the original stock. A transfer of expenses for repairs
to capital account instead of revenue account is the familiar method by
which railway boards of directors artificially inflate their dividends.
However, experience has already furnished the most important clues for
this. According to Lardner, the subsequent labour required during the early
life of a railway for example

"ought not to be denominated repairs, but
should be considered as an essential part of the construction of the railway,
and in the financial accounts should be debited to capital, and not to
revenue, not being expenses due to wear and tear, or to the legitimate
operation of the traffic, but to the original and inevitable incompleteness
of the construction of the line." (Lardner, loc. cit., p. 40.)

"The only sound way is to charge each year's revenue with the depreciation necessarily suffered to earn the revenue, whether the amount is actually spent or not." (Captain Fitzmaurice, "Committee of Inquiry on Caledonian Railway," published in Money Market Review, 1867.)

The separation of the replacement and maintenance of fixed capital
become practically impossible and purposeless in agriculture, at least
when not operated by steam. According to Kirchhof (Handbuch der landwirthschaftlichen Betriebslehre, Dresden, 1852, p. 137),

"wherever there is a complete, though not excessive, supply of implements (of agricultural and other implements and farm appliances of every description) it is the custom to estimate the annual wear and tear and maintenance of the implements, according to the different existing conditions, at a general average of 15 to 25 per cent of the original stock."

In the case of the rolling stock of a railway, repairs and replacement
cannot be separated at all.

"We maintain our stock by number. Whatever
number of engines we have we maintain that. If one is destroyed by age,
and it is better to build a new one, we build it at the expense of revenue,
of course, taking credit for the materials of the old one as far as they
go.... there is a great deal left; there are the wheels, the axles, the
boilers, and in fact a great deal of the old engine is left." (T. Gooch,
Chairman of Great Western Railway Co., R. C. on Railways, p. 858, Nos.
17327-17329.) "...Repairing means renewing; I do not believe in the word
replacement...; once a railway company has bought a vehicle or an engine,
it ought to be repaired, and in that way admit of going on for ever." (No.
17784.) "...The engines are maintained for ever out of this 8&frac12; d.
We rebuild our engines. If you purchase an engine entirely it would be
spending more money than is necessary ... yet there is always a pair
of wheels or an axle or some portion of the engine which comes in, and
hence it cheapens the cost of producing a practically new engine." (No.
17790.) "I am at this moment turning out a new engine every week, or practically
a new engine, for it has a new boiler, cylinder, or framing." (No. 17823.
Archibald Sturrock, Locomotive Superintendent of Great Northern Railway,
in R. C., 1867.)

The same with coaches:

"In the course of time the stock of engines
and vehicles is continually repaired. New wheels are put on at one time,
and a new body at another. The different moving parts most subject to wear
are gradually renewed; and the engines and vehicles may be conceived even
to be subject to such a succession of repairs, that in many of them not
a vestige of the original materials remains.... Even in this case, however,
the old materials of coaches or engines are more or less worked up into
other vehicles or engines, and never totally disappear from the road. The
movable capital therefore may be considered to be in a state of continual
reproduction; and that which, in the case of the permanent way, must take
place altogether at a future epoch, when the entire road will have to be
relaid, takes place in the rolling stock gradually from year to year. Its
existence is perennial, and it is in a constant state of rejuvenescence."
(Lardner, op. cit., pp. 115-16.)

This process, which Lardner here describes relative to a railway,
does not fit the case of an individual factory, but may well serve as an
illustration of continuous, partial reproduction of fixed capital intermingled
with repairs within an entire branch of industry or even within the aggregate
production considered on a social scale.

Here is proof of the lengths to which adroit boards of directors
may go in manipulating the terms repairs and replacement for the purpose
of extracting dividends. According to the above-quoted paper read by R.
P. Williams, various English railway companies wrote off the following
sums from the revenue account, as averages over a number of years, for
repairs and maintenance of the permanent way and buildings (per English
mile of track annually).

London & North Western&pound;370

Midland&pound;225

London & South Western&pound;257

Great Northern &pound;360

Lancashire & Yorkshire&pound;377

South Eastern&pound;263

Brighton&pound;266

Manchester & Sheffield&pound;200

These differences arise only to a very minor degree from differences in
the actual expenses; they are due almost exclusively to different methods
of calculation, according to whether items of expenses are debited to the
capital or the revenue account. Williams says so in so many words that
a lesser charge is booked because this is necessary for a good dividend,
and a higher charge is booked because there is a greater revenue which
can bear it.

In certain cases the wear and tear, and therefore its replacement,
is practically infinitesimal so that nothing but costs of repairs have
to be charged. Lardner's statements below relative to works of art in railroading
apply in general to all such durable structures as docks, canals, iron
and stone bridges, etc.

"That wear and tear which, being due to the slow
operation of time acting upon the more solid structures, produces an effect
altogether insensible when observed through short periods, but which, after
a long interval of time, such, for example, as centuries, must necessitate
the reconstruction of some or all even of the most solid structures. These
changes may not unaptly be assimilated to the periodical and secular inequalities
which take place in the movements of the great bodies of the universe.
The operation of time upon the more massive works of art upon the railway,
such as the bridges, tunnels, viaducts, etc., afford examples of what may
be called the secular wear and tear. The more rapid and visible deterioration,
which is made good by repairs or reconstruction effected at shorter intervals,
is analogous to the periodic inequalities. In the annual repairs is included
the casual damage which the exterior of the more solid and durable works
may from time to time sustain; but, independently of these repairs, age
produces its effects even on these structures, and an epoch must arrive,
however remote it be, at which they would be reduced to a state which will
necessitate their reconstruction. For financial and economic purposes such
an epoch is perhaps too remote to render it necessary to bring it into
practical calculation, and therefore it need here only be noticed in passing."
(Lardner, loc. cit., pp., 38, 39.)

This applies to all similar structures of secular duration, in
which cases therefore the capital advanced need not be gradually replaced
commensurate with their wear and tear, but only the annual average costs
of maintenance and repair need be transferred to the prices of the product.

Although, as we have seen, a greater part of the money returning
for the replacement of the wear and tear of the fixed capital is annually,
or even in shorter intervals, reconverted into its bodily form, nevertheless
every single capitalist requires a sinking fund for that part of his fixed
capital which falls due for reproduction only after a lapse of years but
must then be entirely replaced. A considerable component part of the fixed
capital precludes gradual reproduction because of its peculiar properties.
Besides, in cases where the reproduction takes place piecemeal in such
a way that at short intervals new stock is added to the depreciated old
stock, a previous accumulation of money of a greater or smaller amount,
depending on the specific character of the branch of industry, is necessary
before the replacement can be effected. Not just any sum of money will
suffice for this purpose; a definite amount is needed.

If we study this question on the assumption of simple circulation
of money, without regard to the credit system, of which we shall treat
later, [The capitalist credit system is treated in parts IV and V of the
third volume of Capital. ; Ed.] then the mechanism of this movement
is as follows: It was shown (Buch I, Kap. III, 3a) [English edition: Volume I, Ch.
III, 3a, ; Ed.] that the proportion in which the aggregate mass
of money is distributed over a hoard and means of circulation varies steadily,
if one part of the money available in society constantly lies fallow as
a hoard, while another performs the functions of a medium of circulation
or of an immediate reserve fund of the directly circulating money. Now
in our case money that must be accumulated as a hoard in the hands of a
relatively big capitalist in rather large amounts is thrown all at once
into circulation on the purchase of the fixed capital. It then divides
again in society into medium of circulation and hoard. By means of the
sinking fund, in which the value of the fixed capital flows back to its
starting-point in proportion to its wear and tear, a part of the circulating
money again forms a hoard, for a longer or shorter period, in the hands
of the same capitalist whose hoard had, upon the purchase of the fixed
capital, been transformed into a medium of circulation and passed away
from him. It is a continually changing distribution of the hoard which
exists in society and alternately functions as a medium of circulation
and then is separated again, as a hoard, from the mass of the circulating
money. With the development of the credit system, which necessarily runs
parallel with the development of modern industry and capitalist production,
this money no longer serves as a hoard but as capital; however not in the
hands of its owner but of other capitalists at whose disposal it has been
placed.

Notes

20 On account of the difficulty of determining what is fixed and what circulating capital, Herr Lorenz Stein thinks that
this distinction is meant only to facilitate the treatment of the subject.

21 End of Manuscript IV, beginning
of Manuscript II. ; Ed.

22 The quotations marked R. C. are
from: Royal Commission on Railways. Minutes of Evidence taken before
the Commissioners. Presented to both Houses of Parliament, London, 1867.; The questions and answers are numbered and the numbers given here.