II. Second Stage. Function of Productive Capital

The circuit of capital, which we have here considered, begins with the
act of circulation M ; C, the transmutation of money into commodities ; 
purchase. Circulation must therefore be complemented by the antithetical
metamorphosis C ; M, the transformation of commodities into money ; sale. But the direct result of M ; C<LMP is the interruption of the circulation of the capital-value advanced in the form of money. By the transformation of money-capital into productive capital the capital-value has acquired a bodily form in which it cannot continue to circulate but
must enter into consumption, viz., into productive consumption. The use
of labour-power, labour, can be materialised only in the labour-process.
The capitalist cannot resell the laborer as a commodity because he is not
his chattel slave and the capitalist has not bought anything except the
right to use his labour-power for a certain time. On the other hand the
capitalist cannot use this labour-power in any other way than by utilising
means of production to create commodities with its help. The result of
the first stage is therefore entrance into the second, the productive stage
of capital.

This movement is represented by M ; C<LMP ... P, in which the dots indicate that the circulation of capital is interrupted, while its circular movement continues, since it passes from the sphere of circulation of commodities into that of production. The first stage,
the transformation of money-capital into productive capital, is therefore
merely the harbinger and introductory phase of the second stage, the functioning
of productive capital.

M ; C<LMP presupposes that the individual performing this act not only has at his disposal values in any use-form, but also that he has them in the form of money, that he is the owner of
money. But as the act consists precisely in giving away money, the individual
can remain the owner of money only in so far as the act of giving away
implies a return of money. But money can return to him only through the
sale of commodities. Hence the above act assumes him to be a producer of
commodities.

M ; L. The wage-laborer lives only by the sale of his labour-power.
Its preservation ; his preservation ; requires daily consumption. Hence
payment for it must be continuously repeated at rather short intervals in order that he may be able to repeat acts L ; M ; C or C ; M ; C, repeat
the purchases needed for his self-preservation. For this reason the capitalist
must always meet the wage-laborer in the capacity of a money-capitalist,
and his capital as money-capital. On the other hand if the wage-labourers,
the mass of direct producers, are to perform the act L ; M ; C, they must
constantly be faced with the necessary means of subsistence in purchasable
form, i.e., in the form of commodities. This state of affairs necessitates
a high degree of development of the circulation of products in the form
of commodities, hence also of the volume of commodities produced. When
production by means of wage-labour becomes universal, commodity production
is bound to be the general form of production. This mode of production,
once it is assumed to be general, carries in its wake an ever increasing
division of social labour, that is to say an ever growing differentiation
of the articles which are produced in the form of commodities by a definite
capitalist, ever greater division of complementary processes of production
into independent processes. M ; MP therefore develops to the same extent
as M ; L does, that is to say the production of means of production is
divorced to that extent from the production of commodities whose means
of production they are. And the latter then stand opposed to every producer
of commodities which he does not produce but buys for his particular process
of production. They come from branches of production which, operated independently,
are entirely divorced from his own, enter into his own branch as commodities,
and must therefore be bought. The material conditions of commodity production
face him more and more as products of other commodity producers, as commodities.
And to the same extent the capitalist must assume the role of money-capitalist,
in other words there is an increase in the scale on which his capital must
assume the functions of money-capital.

On the other hand, the same conditions which give rise to the
basic condition of capitalist production, the existence of a class of wage-workers,
facilitate the transition of all commodity production to capitalist commodity
production. As capitalist production develops, it has a disintegrating,
resolvent effect on all older forms of production, which, designed mostly
to meet the direct needs of the producer, transform only the excess produced
into commodities. Capitalist production makes the sale of products the
main interest, at first apparently without affecting the mode of production
itself. Such was for instance the first effect of capitalist world commerce
on such nations as the Chinese, Indians, Arabs, etc. But, secondly, wherever
it takes root capitalist production destroys all forms of commodity production
which are based either on the self-employment of the producers, or merely
on the sale of the excess product as commodities. Capitalist production
first makes the production of commodities general and then, by degrees,
transforms all commodity production into capitalist commodity production.
[3]

Whatever the social form of production, labourers and means of
production always remain factors of it. But in a state of separation from
each other either of these factors can be such only potentially. For production
to go on at all they must unite. The specific manner in which this union
is accomplished distinguishes the different economic epochs of the structure
of society from one another. In the present case, the separation of the
free worker from his means of production is the starting-point given, and
we have seen how and under what conditions these two elements are united
in the hands of the capitalist, namely, as the productive mode of existence
of his capital. The actual process which the personal and material creators
of commodities enter upon when thus brought together, the process of production,
becomes therefore itself a function of capital, the capitalist process
of production, the nature of which has been fully analysed in the first
book of this work. Every enterprise engaged in commodity production becomes
at the same time an enterprise exploiting labour-power. But only the capitalist
production of commodities has become an epoch-making mode of exploitation,
which, in the course of its historical development, revolutionises, through
the organisation of the labour-process and the enormous improvement of
technique, the entire structure of society in a manner eclipsing all former
epochs.

The means of production and labour-power, in so far as they are
forms of existence of advanced capital-value, are distinguished by the
different roles assumed by them during the process of production in the
creation of value, hence also of surplus-value, into constant and variable
capital. Being different components of productive capital they are furthermore
distinguished by the fact that the means of production in the possession
of the capitalist remain his capital even outside of the process of production,
while labour-power becomes the form of existence of an individual capital
only within this process. Whereas labour-power is a commodity only in the
hands of its seller, the wage-labourer, it becomes capital only in the
hands of its buyer, the capitalist who acquires the temporary use of it.
The means of production do not become the material forms of productive
capital, or productive capital, until labour-power, the personal form of
existence of productive capital, is capable of being embodied in them.
Human labour-power is by nature no more capital than by means of production.
They acquire this specific social character only under definite, historically
developed conditions, just as only under such conditions the character
of money is stamped upon precious metals, or that of money-capital upon
money.

Productive capital, in performing its functions, consumes its
own component parts for the purpose of transforming them into a mass of
products of a higher value. Since labour-power acts merely as one of its
organs, the excess of the product's value engendered by its surplus-labour
over and above the value of productive capital's constituent elements is
also the fruit of capital. The surplus-labour of labour-power is the gratuitous
labour performed for capital and thus forms surplus-value for the capitalist,
a value which costs him no equivalent return. The product is therefore
not only a commodity, but a commodity pregnant with surplus-value. Its
value is equal to P + s, that is to say equal to the value of the productive
capital P consumed in the production of the commodity plus the surplus
values created by it. Let us assume that this commodity consists of 10,000
lbs. of yarn, and that means of production worth &pound;372 and labour
power worth &pound;50 were consumed in the fabrication of this quantity
of yarn. During the process of spinning, the spinners transmitted to the
yarn the value of the means of production consumed by their labour, amounting
to &pound;372, and at the same time they created, in proportion with the
labour-power expended by them, new value to the amount of, say, &pound;128.
The 10,000 lbs. of yarn therefore represent a value of &pound;500.