4. Capital and Revenue in Adam Smith

That portion of the value of every commodity (and therefore also of
the annual product) which is but an equivalent of the wages, is equal
to the capital advanced by the capitalist for labour-power; i.e., is
equal to the variable portion of the total capital advanced. The
capitalist recovers this portion of the total capital through a
portion of the newly produced value of the commodities supplied by the
wage-labourers. Whether the variable capital is advanced in the sense
that the capitalist pays the labourer in money for his share in a
product which is not yet ready for sale or which, though ready, has
not yet been sold by the capitalist, or whether he pays him with money
already obtained by the sale of commodities previously supplied by the
labourer, or whether he has drawn this money in advance by means of
credit ; in all these cases the capitalist expends variable capital,
which passes into the hands of the labourers in the form of money, and
on the other hand he possesses the equivalent of this capital-value in
that portion of the value of his commodities in which the labourer has
produced anew his share of its total value, in other words, in which
he has produced the value of his own wages. Instead of giving him this
portion of the value in the bodily form of his own product, the
capitalist pays it to him in money. For the capitalist the variable
portion of his advanced capital-value now exists in the form of
commodities, while the labourer has received the equivalent for his
sold labour-power in the form of money.

Now while that portion of the capital advanced by the capitalist,
which has been converted by the purchase of labour-power into variable
capital, functions in the process of production itself as operative
labour-power and by the expenditure of this power is produced anew as
a new value, in the form of commodities, i.e., is reproduced ; hence
a reproduction, or new production, of advanced capital-value ; the
labourer spends the value, or price, of his sold labour-power on means
of subsistence, on means for the reproduction of his labour-power. An
amount of money equal to the variable capital forms his income, hence
his revenue, which lasts only so long as he can sell his labour-power
to the capitalist.

The commodity of the wage-labourer ; his labour power ; serves as a
commodity only to the extent that it is incorporated in the capital of
the capitalist, acts as capital; on the other hand the capital
expended by the capitalist as money-capital in the purchase of
labour-power functions as a revenue in the hands of the seller of
labour-power, the wage labourer.

Various processes of circulation and production intermingle here,
which Adam Smith does not distinguish.

First: Acts pertaining to the process of circulation. The labourer
sells his commodity ; labour-power ; to the capitalist; the money
with which the capitalist buys it is from his point of view money
invested for the production of surplus-value, hence money-capital; it
is not spent but advanced. (This is the real meaning of
"advance" ; the avance of the physiocrats ; no matter where the capitalist gets the money. Every value which the capitalist pays
out for the purposes of the productive process is advanced from his
point of view, regardless of whether this takes place before or post
festum; it is advanced to the process of production itself.) The same
takes place here as in every other sale of commodities: The seller
gives away a use-value (in this case his labour-power) and receives
its value (realises its price) in money; the buyer gives away his
money and receives in return the commodity itself ; in this case
labour-power.

Second: In the process of production the purchased
labour-power now forms a part of the functioning capital, and the
labourer himself serves here merely as a special bodily form of this
capital, distinguished from its elements existing in the bodily form
of means of production. During the process, by expending his
labour-power, the labourer adds value to the means of production which
he converts into products equal to the value of his labour-power
(exclusive of surplus-value); he therefore reproduces for the
capitalist in the form of commodities that portion of his capital
which has been, or has to be, advanced by him for wages, produces for
him an equivalent of the latter; hence he reproduces for the
capitalist that capital which the latter can "advance" once more for
the purchase of labour-power.

Third: In the sale of a commodity one portion of its selling price
replaces the variable capital advanced by the capitalist, whereby on
the one hand he is enabled anew to buy labour-power, and the labourer
on the other to sell it anew.

In all purchases and sales of commodities ; so far as only these
transactions are under discussion ; it is quite immaterial what
becomes of the proceeds the seller receives for his commodities, and
what becomes of the bought articles of use in the hands of the buyer.
Hence, so far as the mere process of circulation is concerned, it is
quite immaterial that the labour-power bought by the capitalist
reproduces capital-value for him, and that on the other hand the money
received by the labourer as the purchase-price of his labour-power
constitutes his revenue. The magnitude of value of the labourer's
article of commerce, his labour-power, is not affected either by its
forming "revenue" for him or by the fact that the use of this
article of commerce by the buyer reproduces capital-value for this
buyer.

Since the value of labour-power ; i.e., the adequate selling price of
this commodity ; is determined by the quantity of labour required for
its reproduction, and this quantity of labour itself is here
determined by that needed for the production of the necessary means of
subsistence of the labourer, hence for the maintenance of his
existence, the wages become the revenue on which the labourer has to
live.

It is entirely wrong, when Adam Smith says (p. 223):

"That portion of the stock which is laid out in maintaining productive hands ... after having served in the function of a capital to him [the capitalist] ... constitutes a revenue to them" [the labourers].

The money with which the capitalist pays for the labour-power purchased by
him "serves in the function of a capital to him," since he
thereby incorporates labour-power in the material constituents of his
capital and thus enables his capital to function altogether as
productive capital. We must make this distinction: The labour-power is
a commodity, not capital, in the hands of the labourer, and it
constitutes for him a revenue so long as he can continuously repeat
its sale; it functions as capital after its sale, in the hands of the
capitalist, during the process of production itself. That which here
serves twice is labour-power: as a commodity which is sold at its
value, in the hands of the labourer; as a power-producing value and
use-value, in the hands of the capitalist who has bought it. But the
labourer does not receive the money from the capitalist until after he
has given him the use of his labour-power, after it has already been
realised in the value of the product of labour. The capitalist
possesses this value before he pays for it. Hence it is not the money
which functions twice: first, as the money-form of the variable
capital, and then as wages. On the contrary it is labour-power which
has functioned twice: first, as a commodity in the sale of
labour-power (in stipulating the amount of wages to be paid, money
acts merely as an ideal measure of value and need not even be in the
hands of the capitalist); secondly, in the process of production, in
which it functions as capital, i.e., as an element, in the hands of
the capitalist, creating use-value and value. Labour-power already
supplied, in the form of commodities, the equivalent which is to be
paid to the labourer, before it is paid by the capitalist to the
labourer in money-form. Hence the labourer himself creates the fund
out of which the capitalist pays him. But this is not all.

The money which the labourer receives is spent by him in order to
preserve his labour-power, or ; viewing the capitalist class and the
working-class in their totality ; in order to preserve for the
capitalist the instrument by means of which alone he can remain a
capitalist.

Thus the continuous purchase and sale of labour-power perpetuates on
the one hand labour-power as an element of capital, by virtue of which
the latter appears as the creator of commodities, articles of use
having value, by virtue of which, furthermore, that portion of capital
which buys labour-power is continually restored by labour-power's
own product, and consequently the labourer himself constantly creates
the fund of capital out of which he is paid. On the other hand the
constant sale of labour-power becomes the source, ever renewing
itself, of the maintenance of the labourer and hence his labour-power
appears as that faculty through which he secures the revenue by which
he lives. Revenue in this case signifies nothing else than a
appropriation of values effected by ever repeated sales of a commodity
(labour-power), these values serving only for the continual
reproduction of the commodity to be sold. And to this extent Smith is
right when he says that the portion of the value of the product
created by the labourer himself for which the capitalist pays him an
equivalent in the form of wages, becomes the source of revenue for the
labourer. But this does not alter the nature or magnitude of this
portion of the value of the commodity any more than the value of the
means of production is changed by the fact that they function as
capital-values, or the nature and magnitude of a straight line are
changed by the fact that it serves as the base of some triangle or as
the diameter of some ellipse. The value of labour-power remains quite
as independently definite as that of those means of production. This
portion of the value of a commodity neither consists of revenue as an
independent factor constituting this value-part nor does it resolve
itself into revenue. While this new value constantly reproduced by the
labourer constitutes a source of revenue for him, his revenue
conversely is not a constituent of the new value produced by him. The
magnitude of the share paid to him of the new value created by him
determines the value-magnitude of his revenue, not vice versa. The
fact that this part of the newly created value forms a revenue for
him, indicates merely what becomes of it, shows the character of its
application, and has no more to do with its formation than with that
of any other value. If my receipts are ten shillings a week that
changes nothing in the nature of the value of the ten shillings, nor
in the magnitude of their value. As in the case of every other
commodity so in that of labour-power its value is determined by the
amount of this labour is necessary for its reproduction; that the
amount of this labour is determined by the value of the labourer's
necessary means of subsistence, hence is equal to the labour required
for the reproduction of the very conditions of his life ; that is
peculiar for this commodity (labour-power), but no more peculiar than
the fact that the value of labouring cattle is determined by the value
of the means of subsistence necessary for its maintenance, i.e., by
the amount of human labour necessary to produce these means of
subsistence.

But it is this category of "revenue" which is to blame for all
the harmful confusion in Adam Smith. The various kinds of revenue form
with him the "component parts" of the annually produced, newly created commodity-value, while, vice versa, the two parts into which
this commodity-value resolves itself for the capitalist ; the
equivalent of his variable capital advanced in the form of money when
purchasing labour, and the other portion of the value, the surplus-
value, which likewise belongs to him but did not cost him
anything ; form sources of revenue. The equivalent of the variable
capital is advanced again for labour-power and to that extent forms a
revenue for the labourer in the shape of wages; since the other
portion, the surplus-value, does not serve to replace any advance of
capital for the capitalist, it may be spent by him in articles of
consumption (both necessities and luxuries) or consumed as revenue
instead of forming capital-value of any description. Commodity-value
itself is the preliminary condition of this revenue and its component
parts differ, from the point of view of the capitalist, only to the
extent that they constitute either an equivalent for an excess over
the variable capital-value advanced by him. Both of them consist of
nothing but labour-power expended during the production of
commodities, rendered fluent in labour. They consist of outlay, not
income or revenue ; of outlay of labour.

In accordance with the quid pro quo, by which the revenue becomes the
source of commodity-value instead of the commodity-value being the
source of revenue, the value of commodities now has the appearance of
being "composed" of the various kinds of revenue; these revenues
are determined independently of one another, and the total value of
commodities is determined by the addition of the values of these
revenues. But now the question is how to determine the value of each
of these revenues which are supposed to form commodity-value. In the
case of wages it can be done, for wages represent the value of their
commodity, labour-power, and this value is determinable (the same as
that of all other commodities) by the labour required for the
reproduction of this commodity. But surplus-value, or, as Adam Smith
has it, its two forms, profit and rent, how are they determined? Here
Adam Smith has but empty phrases to offer. At one time he represents
wages and surplus-value (or wages and profit) as component parts of
the value, or price, of commodities; at another, and almost in the
same breath, as parts into which the price of commodities "resolves
itself"; but this means on the contrary that the commodity-value
is the thing given first and that different parts of this given value
fall in the form of different revenues to the share of different
persons engaged in the productive process. This is by no means
identical with the notion that value is "composed" of these
three "component parts." If I determine the lengths of three
different straight lines independently, and then form out of these
three lines as "component parts" a fourth straight line equal to
their sum, it is by no means the same procedure as when I have some
given straight line before me and for some purpose divide it,
"resolve" it, so to say, into three different parts. In the
first case, the length of the line changes throughout with the lengths
of the three lines whose sum it is; in the second case, the lengths of
the three parts of the line are from the outset limited by the fact
that they are parts of a line of given length.

As a matter of fact, if we adhere to that part of Smith's
exposition which is correct, namely, that the value newly created by
the annual labour and contained in the annual social commodity-product
(the same as in every individual commodity, or every daily, weekly,
etc., product) is equal to the value of the variable capital advanced
(i.e., to the value-part intended to purchase new labour-power) plus
the surplus-value which the capitalist can realise in means of his
individual consumption ; simple reproduction being assumed and other
circumstances remaining the same; if we furthermore keep in mind that
Adam Smith lumps together labour, so far as it creates value and is an
expenditure of labour-power, and labour, so far as it creates use
value, i.e., is expended in a useful, appropriate manner ; then the
entire conception amounts to this: The value of every commodity is the
product of labour; hence this is also true of the value of the product
of the annual labour or of the value of society's annual 
commodity-product. But since all labour resolves itself 1) into necessary
labour-time, in which the labourer reproduces merely an equivalent for
the capital advanced in the purchase of his labour-power, and 2) into
surplus-labour, by which he supplies the capitalist with a value for
which the latter does not give any equivalent, hence surplus-value, it
follows that all commodity value can resolve itself only into these
two component parts, so that ultimately it forms a revenue for the
working-class in the form of wages, and for the capitalist class in
the form of surplus-value. As for the constant capital-value, i.e.,
the value of the means of production consumed in the creation of the
annual product, it cannot be explained how this value gets into that
of the new product (except for the phrase that the capitalist charges
the buyer with it in the sale of his goods), but ultimately, since the
means of production are themselves products of labour, this portion of
value can, in turn, consist only of an equivalent of the variable
capital and of surplus-value, of a product of necessary labour and of
surplus-labour. The fact that the values of these means of production
function in the hands of their employers as capital-values does not
prevent them from having "originally," in the hands of others if
we go to the bottom of the matter ; even though at some previous
time ; resolved themselves into the same two portions of value, hence
into two different sources of revenue.

One point herein is correct: that the matter presents itself
differently in the movement of social capital, i.e., of the totality
of individual capitals, from the way it presents itself for each
individual capital considered separately, hence from the standpoint of
each individual capitalist. For the latter the value of commodities
resolves itself into 1) a constant element (a fourth one, as Adam
Smith says), and 2) the sum of wages and surplus-value, or wages,
profit and rent. But from the point of view of society the fourth
element of Adam Smith, the constant capital-value, disappears.