1. The Formation of a Hoard

It is evident that both the investments of capital in the numerous
lines of industry constituting class I and the different individual
investments of capital within each of these lines of industry, according to
their age, i.e., the space of time during which they already have
functioned, quite aside from their volumes, technical conditions, market
conditions, etc., are in different stages of the process of successive
transformation from surplus-value into potential money-capital, whether
this money-capital is to serve for the expansion of the active capital or
for the establishment of new industrial enterprises ; the two forms of
expansion of production. One part of the capitalists is continually
converting its potential money-capital, grown to an appropriate size, into
productive capital, i.e., with the money hoarded by the conversion of
surplus-value into money they buy means of production, additional
elements of constant capital. Another part of the capitalists is meanwhile
still engaged in hoarding its potential money-capital. Capitalists
belonging to these two categories confront each other: some as buyers,
the others as sellers, and each one of the two exclusively in one of these
roles.

For instance, let A sell 600 (equal to 400 c + 100 v + 100 s ) to B
(who may represent more than one buyer). A sells 600 in commodities
for 600 in money, of which 100 are surplus-value which he withdraws
from circulation and hoards in the form of money. But these 100 in
money are but the money-form of the surplus-product, which was the
bearer of a value of 100. The formation of a hoard is no production at
all, hence not an increment of production, either. The action of the
capitalist consists here merely in withdrawing from circulation the 100
in money he grabbed by the sale of his surplus-product, holding on to it
and impounding it. This operation is carried on not alone by A, but at
numerous points along the periphery of circulation by other capitalists,
A', A'', A''', all of them working with equal zeal at this sort of hoard
formation. These numerous points at which money is withdrawn from
circulation and accumulated in numerous individual hoards or potential
money-capitals appear as so many obstacles to circulation, because they
immobilise the money and deprive it of its capacity to circulate for a
certain length of time. But it must be borne in mind that hoarding takes
place in the simple circulation of commodities long before this is based
on capitalist commodity production. The quantity of money existing in
society is always greater than the part of it in actual circulation, although
this swells or subsides according to circumstances. We find here again
the same hoards, and the same formation of hoards, but now as an
element immanent in the capitalist process of production.

One can understand the pleasure experienced when all these
potential capitals within the credit system, by their concentration in the
hands of banks, etc., become disposable, "loanable capital," money-capital,
which indeed is no longer passive and music of the future, but
active capital growing rank.

However, A accomplishes the formation of a hoard only to the extent
that he acts only as a seller, so far as his surplus-product is concerned,
and not afterward as a buyer. His successive production of surplus-products,
the vehicles of his surplus-value to be converted into money, is
therefore the premise of his forming a hoard. In the present case, where
we are examining only the circulation within category I, the bodily form
of the surplus-product, as that of the total product of which it is a part,
is the bodily form of an element of constant capital I, that is to say, it
belongs in the category of means of production creating means of
production. We shall see presently what becomes of it, what function it
performs, in the hands of buyers B, B', B'', etc.

It must be noted at this point first and foremost that although
withdrawing money to the amount of his surplus-value from circulation
and hoarding it, A on the other hand throws commodities into it without
withdrawing other commodities in return. The capitalists B, B', B'', etc.,
are thereby enabled to throw money into circulation and withdraw only
commodities from it. In the present case these commodities, according
to their bodily form and their destination, enter into the constant capital
of B, B', etc., as fixed or circulating element. We shall hear more about
this anon when we deal with the buyer of the surplus-product, with B,
B', etc.

Let us note by the way: Once more we find here, as we did in the
case of simple reproduction, that the exchange of the various component
parts of the annual product, i.e., their circulation (which must comprise
at the same time the reproduction of the capital, and indeed its
restoration in its various determinations, such as constant, variable,
fixed, circulating, money- and commodity-capital) does not by any
means presuppose mere purchase of commodities supplemented by a
subsequent sale, or a sale supplemented by a subsequent purchase, so
that there would actually be a bare exchange of commodity for
commodity, as Political Economy assumes, especially the free-trade
school since the physiocrats and Adam Smith. We know that the fixed
capital, once the expenditure for it is made, is not replaced during the
entire period of its function, but continues to act in its old form, while its
value is gradually precipitated in the form of money. Now we have seen
that the periodical renewal of fixed capital II (the entire capital-value II
being converted into elements worth I(v+s) ) presupposes on the one hand
the mere purchase of the fixed part of II c, reconverted from the form of
money into its bodily form, to which corresponds the mere sale of I s ; and
presupposes on the other hand the mere sale on the part of II c, the sale
of its fixed (depreciation) part of the value precipitated in money, to
which corresponds the mere purchase of Is. In order that the exchange
may take place normally in this case, it must be assumed that the mere
purchase on the part of II c is equal in magnitude of value to the mere
sale on the part of II c, and that in the same way the mere sale of I s to II c,
section 1, is equal to its mere purchase from II c, section 2.
Otherwise simple reproduction is disturbed. Mere purchase here
must be offset by a mere sale there. It must likewise be assumed in this
case that the mere sale of that portion of I s which forms the hoards of A,
A', A'' is balanced by the mere purchase of that portion of I s which
converts the hoards of B, B', and B'' into elements of additional
productive capital.

So far as the balance is restored by the fact that the buyer acts later
on as a seller to the same amount of value, and vice versa, the money
returns to the side that advanced it on purchasing, and which sold
before it bought again. But the actual balance, so far as the exchange of
commodities itself, the exchange of the various portions of the annual
product is concerned, demands that the values of the commodities
exchanged for one another be equal.

But inasmuch as only one-sided exchanges are made, a number of
mere purchases on the one hand, a number of mere sales on the other ; 
and we have seen that the normal exchange of the annual product on
the basis of capitalism necessitates such one-sided metamorphoses ; the
balance can be maintained only on the assumption that in amount the
value of the one-sided purchases and that of the one-sided sales tally.
The fact that the production of commodities is the general form of
capitalist production implies the role which money is playing in it not
only as a medium of circulation, but also as money-capital, and engenders
certain conditions of normal exchange peculiar to this mode of
production and therefore of the normal course of reproduction, whether
it be on a simple or on an extended scale ; conditions which change into
so many conditions of abnormal movement, into so many possibilities of
crises, since a balance is itself an accident owing to the spontaneous
nature of this production.

We have also seen that in the exchange of I v for a corresponding
amount of value of II c, there takes place in the end, precisely for II c, a
replacement of commodities II by an equivalent commodity-value I, that
therefore on the part of aggregate capitalist II the sale of his own
commodities is subsequently supplemented by the purchase of
commodities from I of the same amount of value. This replacement
takes place. But what does not take place is an exchange between
capitalists I and II of their respective goods. II sells its commodities to
working-class I. The latter confronts it one-sidedly, as a buyer of
commodities, and it confronts that class one-sidedly as a seller of
commodities. With the money proceeds so obtained II c confronts
aggregate capitalist I one-sidedly as a buyer of commodities, and
aggregate capitalist I confronts it one-sidedly as a seller of commodities
up to the amount of I v. It is only by means of this sale of commodities
that I finally reproduces its variable capital in the form of money-capital.
If capital I faces that of II one-sidedly as a seller of commodities to the
amount of I v, it faces working-class I as a buyer of commodities
purchasing their labour-power. And if working-class I faces capitalist II
one-sidedly as a buyer of commodities (namely, as a buyer of means of
subsistence), it faces capitalist I one-sidedly as a seller of commodities,
namely, as a seller of its labour-power.

The constant supply of labour-power on the part of working-class I,
the reconversion of a portion of commodity-capital I into the money-form
of variable capital, the replacement of a portion of commodity-capital II
by natural elements of constant capital II c ; all these necessary premises
demand one another, but they are brought about by a very complicated
process, including three processes of circulation which occur
independently of one another but intermingle. This process is so
complicated that it offers ever so many occasions for running
abnormally.