2. The Additional Constant Capital

The surplus-product, the bearer of surplus-value, does not cost its
appropriators, capitalists I, anything. They are by no manner of means
obliged to advance any money or commodities in order to obtain it. Even
among the physiocrats an advance was the general form of value
embodied in elements of productive capital. Hence what capitalists I
advance is nothing but their constant and variable capital. The labourer
not only preserves by his labour their constant capital; he not only
replaces the value of their variable capital by a corresponding newly
created portion of value in the form of commodities; by his surplus-labour
he supplies them with a surplus-value existing in the form of
surplus-product. By the successive sale of this surplus-product they form
a hoard, additional potential money-capital. In the case under
consideration, this surplus-product consists from the outset of means of
production of means of production. It is only when it reaches the hands
of B, B', B'', etc. (I) that this surplus-product functions as additional
constant capital. But it is this virtualiter even before it is sold, even in
the hands of the accumulators of hoards, A, A', A'' (I). If we consider
merely the amount of value of the reproduction on the part of I, we are
still moving within the bounds of simple reproduction, for no additional
capital has been set in motion to create this virtualiter additional
constant capital (the surplus-product), nor has any greater amount of
surplus-labour been expended than that on the basis of simple
reproduction. The difference is here only in the form of the surplus-labour
performed, in the concrete nature of its particular useful
character. It has been expended in means of production for I c instead of
II c, in means of production of means of production instead of means of
production of articles of consumption. In the case of simple reproduction
it was assumed that the entire surplus-value I is spent as revenue, hence
in commodities II. Hence the surplus-value consisted only of such means
of production as have to replace constant capital II in its bodily form. In
order that the transition from simple to extended reproduction may take
place, production in department I must be in a position to fabricate
fewer elements of constant capital for II and so many the more for I. This
transition, which does not always take place without difficulties, is facilitated
by the fact that some of the products of I may serve as means of
production in either department.

It follows, then, that, considering the matter merely from the angle of
volume of values, the material substratum of extended reproduction is
produced within simple reproduction. It is simply surplus-labour of
working-class I expended directly in the production of means of
production, in the creation of virtual additional capital I. The formation
of virtual additional money-capital on the part of A, A' and A'' (1) ; by
the successive sale of their surplus-product which was formed without
any capitalist expenditure of money ; is therefore simply the money-form
of additionally produced means of production I.

Consequently production of virtual additional capital expresses in our
case (we shall see that it may also be formed in a quite different way)
nothing but a phenomenon of the process of production itself,
production, in a particular form, of elements of productive capital.

The production of additional virtual money-capital on a large scale, at
numerous points of the periphery of circulation, is therefore but a result
and expression of multifarious production of virtually additional
productive capital, whose rise does not itself require additional
expenditure of money on the part of the industrial capitalist.
The successive transformation of this virtually additional productive
capital into virtual money-capital (hoard) on the part of A, A', A'', etc. (I),
occasioned by the successive sale of their surplus-product ; hence by
repeated one-sided sale of commodities without a supplementing
purchase ; is accomplished by a repeated withdrawal of money from
circulation and a corresponding formation of a hoard. Except in the case
where the buyer is a gold producer, this hoarding does not in any way
imply additional wealth in precious metals, but only a change in the
function of money previously circulating. A while ago it functioned as a
medium of circulation, now it functions as a hoard, as virtually new
money-capital in the process of formation. Thus the formation of
additional money-capital and the quantity of the precious metals existing
in a country are not in any causal relation to each other.

Hence it follows furthermore: The greater the productive capital
already functioning in a country (including the labour-power, the
producer of the surplus-product, incorporated in it), the more developed
the productive power of labour and thereby also the technical means for
the rapid expansion of the production of means of production ; the
greater therefore the quantity of the surplus-product both as to its value
and as to the quantity of use-values in which it is represented ; so much
the greater is

1) the virtually additional productive capital in the form
of surplus-product in the hands of A, A', A'', etc., and

2) the quantity of this surplus-product transformed into money, and
hence that of the virtually additional money-capital in the hands of A, A',
A''. The fact that Fullarton for instance does not want to hear of over-production
in the ordinary sense but only of the over-production of
capital, meaning money-capital, again shows how extremely little of the
mechanism of their own system even the best bourgeois economists
understand.

Whereas the surplus-product, directly produced and appropriated by
the capitalists A, A', A'' (I), is the real basis of the accumulation of
capital, i.e., of extended reproduction, although it does not actually
function in this capacity until it reaches the hands of B, B', B'', etc. (I), it
is on the contrary absolutely unproductive in its chrysalis stage of
money ; as a hoard and virtual money-capital in process of gradual
formation ; runs parallel with the process of production in this form, but
lies outside of it. It is a dead weight of capitalist production. The
eagerness to utilise this surplus-value accumulating as virtual money-capital
for the purpose of deriving profits or revenue from it finds its
object accomplished in the credit system and "papers." Money-capital
thereby gains in another form an enormous influence on the course and
the stupendous development of the capitalist system of production.
The surplus-product converted into virtual money-capital will grow so
much more in volume, the greater was the total amount of already
functioning capital whose functioning brought it into being. With the
absolute increase of the volume of the annually reproduced virtual
money-capital its segmentation also becomes easier, so that it is more
rapidly invested in any particular business, either in the hands of the
same capitalist or in those of others (for instance members of the family,
in the case of a partition of inherited property, etc.). By segmentation of
money-capital is meant here that it is wholly detached from the parent
stock in order to be invested as a new money-capital in a new and
independent business.

While the sellers of the surplus-product, A, A', A'', etc. (I), have
obtained it as a direct outcome of the process of production, which does
not envisage any additional acts of circulation except the advance of
constant and variable capital required also in simple reproduction; and
while they thereby construct the real basis for reproduction on an
extended scale, and in actual fact manufacture virtually additional
capital, the attitude of B, B', B'', etc. (I), is different. 1) Not until it
reaches the hands of B, B', B'', etc. (I), will the surplus-product of A, A',
A'', etc., actually function as additional constant capital (we leave out of
consideration for the present the other element of productive capital, the
additional labour-power, in other words, the additional variable capital).

2) In order that that surplus-product may reach their hands an act of
circulation is wanted ; they must buy it.

In regard to point 1 it should be noted here that a large portion of the
surplus-product (virtually additional constant capital), although produced
by A, A', A'' (I) in a given year, may not function as industrial capital in
the hands of B, B', B'' (I) until the following year or still later. With
reference to point 2, the question arises: Whence comes the money
needed for the process of circulation?

Since the products created by B, B', B'', etc. (I), re-enter in kind into
their own process, it goes without saying that pro tanto a portion of their
own surplus-product is transferred directly (without any intervention of
circulation) to their productive capital and becomes an additional
element of constant capital. And pro tanto they do not effect the
conversion of the surplus-product of A, A', etc. (I), into money. Aside
from this, where does the money come from? We know that B, B', B'',
etc. (I) have formed their hoard in the same way as A, A', etc., by the
sale of their respective surplus-products. Now they have arrived at the
point where their hoarded, only virtual, money-capital is to function
effectively as additional money-capital. But this is merely going round in
circles. The question still remains: Where does the money come from
which the B's (I) before withdrew from circulation and accumulated?
We know from the analysis of simple reproduction that capitalists I
and II must have a certain amount of money at hand in order to be able
to exchange their surplus-product. In that case the money which served
only as revenue to be spent for articles of consumption returned to the
capitalists in the same measure in which they had advanced it for the
exchange of their respective commodities. Here the same money re-appears,
but performing a different function. The A's and B's (I) supply
one another alternately with the money for converting surplus-product
into additional virtual money-capital, and throw the newly formed
money-capital alternately back into circulation as a means of purchase.
The only assumption made in this case is that the amount of money
in the country in question (the velocity of circulation, etc., being
constant) should suffice for both the active circulation and the reserve
hoard. As we have seen this is the same assumption as had to be made
in the case of the simple circulation of commodities. Only the function of
the hoards is different in the present case. Furthermore, the available
amount of money must be larger, first, because under capitalist
production all the products (with the exception of newly produced
precious metals and the few products consumed by the producer
himself) are created as commodities and must therefore pass through
the pupation stage of money; secondly, because on a capitalist basis the
quantity of the commodity-capital and the magnitude of its value is not
only absolutely greater but also grows with incomparably greater
rapidity; thirdly, because an ever expanding variable capital must always
be converted into money-capital; fourthly, because the formation of new
money-capitals keeps pace with the extension of production, so that the
material for corresponding hoard formation must be available.

This is generally true of the first phase of capitalist production, in
which even the credit system is mostly accompanied by metallic
circulation, and it applies to the most developed phase of the credit
system as well, to the extent that metallic circulation remains its basis.
On the one hand an additional production of precious metals, being
alternately abundant or scarce, may here exert a disturbing influence on
the prices of commodities not only at long, but also at very short
intervals. On the other hand the entire credit mechanism is continually
occupied in reducing the actual metallic circulation to a relatively more
and more decreasing minimum by means of sundry operations,
methods, and technical devices. The artificiality of the entire machinery
and the possibility of disturbing its normal course increase to the same
extent.

The different B's, B''s, B'''s, etc. (I), whose virtual new money-capital
enters upon its function as active capital, may have to buy their products
(portions of their surplus-product) from one another, or to sell them to
one another. Pro tanto the money advanced by them for the circulation
of their surplus-product flows back under normal conditions to the
different B's in the same proportion in which they had advanced it for
the circulation of their respective commodities. If the money circulates
as a means of payment, then only balances are to be squared so far as
the mutual purchases and sales do not cover one another. But it is
important first and foremost to assume here, as everywhere, metallic
circulation in its simplest, most primitive form, because then the flux
and reflux, the squaring of balances, in short all elements appearing
under the credit system as consciously regulated processes present
themselves as existing independently of the credit system, and the
matter appears in primitive form instead of the later, reflected form.