III. Exchange between the Two Departments I(v + s) versus IIc 

We begin with the great exchange between the two classes. (1,000v
+ 1,000s) I ; these values consisting, in the hands of their producers, of means of production in their natural form, are exchanged for 2,000 IIc,
for values consisting of articles of consumption in their bodily form. The
capitalist class of II thereby reconverts its constant capital of 2,000 from
the form of articles of consumption into that of means of production of
articles of consumption, into a form in which it can once more function
as a factor of the labour-process and for purposes of self-expansion of
value as constant capital-value. On the other hand the equivalent of the
labour-power of I (1,000v) and the surplus-value of the capitalists of I
(1,000s) are realised thereby in articles of consumption; both of them
are converted from their bodily form of means of production into a bodily
form in which they can be consumed as revenue.

Now, this mutual exchange is accomplished by means of a circulation
of money, which promotes it just as much as it renders its
understanding difficult, but which is of decisive importance because the
variable portion of capital must ever resume the form of money, as
money-capital converting itself from the form of money into labour-power.
The variable capital must be advanced in the form of money in
all branches of production carried on at the entire periphery of society
simultaneously alongside each other, regardless of whether they belong
to category I or II. The capitalist buys the labour-power before it enters
into the process of production, but pays for it only at stipulated times,
after it has been expended in the production of use-values. He owns,
together with the remainder of the value of the product, also that portion
of it which is only an equivalent for the money expended in the payment
of labour-power, that portion of the value of the product which
represents variable capital. In this portion of value the labourer has
already supplied the capitalist with the equivalent of his wages. But it is
the reconversion of commodities into money, their sale, which restores
to the capitalist his variable capital in the form of money-capital, which
he may advance once more for the purchase of labour-power.

In department I, then, the aggregate capitalist has paid &pound;1,000 (I say
&pound; solely to indicate that it is value in the form of money), equal to
1,000v, to the labourers for the value of product I already existing as the
v-portion, i.e., of the means of production created by them. With these
&pound;1,000 the labourers buy articles of consumption of the same value
from capitalists II, thereby converting one half of the constant capital II
into money; capitalists II, in their turn, buy with these &pound;1,000 means of
production, valued at 1,000, from capitalists I; thereby, as far as the
latter are concerned, the variable capital-value equal to 1,000v, which,
being part of their product, existed in the bodily form of means of
production, is thus reconverted into money and can now function anew
in the hands of capitalists I as money-capital, which is transformed into
labour-power, hence into the most essential element of productive
capital. In this way their variable capital flows back to them in the form
of money, as a result of the realisation of some of their commodity-capital.

As for the money required to exchange the s-portion of commodity-capital
I for the second half of constant capital II, it may be advanced in
various ways. In reality this circulation embraces innumerable separate
purchases and sales by the individual capitalists of both categories, the
money coming in any event from these capitalists, since we have already
accounted for the money put into circulation by the labourers. A
capitalist of category II can buy, with the money-capital he has besides
his productive capital, means of production from capitalists of category I,
and, vice versa, a capitalist of category I can buy, with money-funds
assigned for personal and not for capital expenditure, articles of
consumption from capitalists of category II. A certain supply of money,
to be used either for the advancement of capital or for the expenditure of
revenue must under all circumstances be assumed to exist beside the
productive capital in the hands of the capitalists, as we have shown
above in parts I and II. Let us assume ; the proportion is wholly
immaterial for our purpose ; that one half of the money is advanced by
capitalists II in the purchase of means of production for the replacement
of their constant capital, while the other half is spent by capitalists I for
articles of consumption. In that case department II advances &pound;500 for
the purchase of means of production from department I, thereby
replacing (inclusive of the above &pound;1,000 coming from the labourers of
department I) three-quarters of its constant capital in kind, with the
&pound;500 so obtained department I buys articles of consumption from II,
thereby completing for one half of the s-portion of its commodity-capital
the circulation c ; m ; c, and thus realising its product in the
consumption-fund. By means of this second process the &pound;500 return to
the hands of II as money-capital existing beside its productive capital.
On the other hand I expends money to the amount of &pound;500 for the
purchase of II's articles of consumption in anticipation of the sale of that
half of the s-portion of its commodity-capital which is still lying in store
as product. With the same &pound;500 II buys from I means of production,
thereby replacing in kind its entire constant capital
(1,000 + 500 + 500 = 2,000) while I realises its entire surplus-value in
articles of consumption. On the whole, the entire exchange of
commodities in the amount of &pound;4,000 would be effected with a money-circulation
of &pound;2,000 which amount is attained only because the entire
annual product is described as exchanged in bulk, in a few large lots.
The important point here is that II has not only reconverted its constant
capital reproduced in the form of articles of consumption, into the form
of means of production, but has besides recovered the &pound;500 which it
had advanced to the circulation for the purchase of means of production;
and that, similarly, I again possesses not only its variable capital, which
it had reproduced in the form of means of production, in money-form, as
money-capital once more directly convertible into labour-power, but also
the &pound;500 expended in the purchase of articles of consumption in
anticipation of the sale of the s-portion of its capital. These &pound;500 flow
back to it not because of the expenditure incurred, but because of the
subsequent sale of a part of its commodity-product incorporating one
half of its surplus-value.

In both cases it is not only that the constant capital of II is
reconverted from the form of a product into the bodily form of means of
production, in which alone it can function as capital; and likewise it is
not only that the variable portion of the capital of I is converted into its
money-form, and the surplus-value portion of the means of production of
I into its consumable form, the form in which it can be used as revenue.
It is also that the &pound;500 of money-capital, advanced by II in the purchase
of means of production prior to selling the corresponding compensating
portion of the value of its constant capital ; existing in the form of means
of consumption ; flow back to II; and furthermore back to I flow the &pound;500
which were expended anticipando by it for the purchase of articles of
consumption. If the money advanced by II at the expense of the constant
portion of its commodity-product, and by I at the expense of the surplus-value
portion of its commodity-product, flows back to them, this is solely
because the one class of capitalists throws &pound;500 into circulation over
and above the constant capital existing in the form of commodities in II,
and the other class a like amount over and above the surplus-value
existing in the form of commodities in I. In the last analysis the two
departments have mutually paid one another in full by the exchange of
equivalents in the shape of their respective commodities. The money
thrown into circulation by them in excess of the values of their
commodities, as a means of effecting the exchange of these
commodities, returns to each one of them out of the circulation in
proportion to the quota which each of the two had thrown into
circulation. Neither has grown a farthing richer thereby. II possessed a
constant capital of 2,000 in the form of articles of consumption plus
500 in money; now it possesses 2,000 in means of production plus 500
in money, the same as before; in the same way I possesses, as before, a
surplus-value of 1,000 (consisting of commodities, means of production,
now converted into a consumption-fund) plus 500 in money. The
general conclusion is this: Of the money which the industrial capitalists
throw into circulation to accomplish their own commodity circulation,
whether at the expense of the constant part of the commodity-value or at
the expense of the surplus-value existing in the commodities to the
extent that it is laid out as revenue, as much returns into the hands of
the respective capitalists as was advanced by them for the money-circulation.

As for the reconversion of the variable capital of class I into the form
of money, this capital, after the capitalists of I invested it in wages,
exists for them first in the form of commodities in which the labourers
delivered it to them. They paid this capital in the form of money to these
labourers as the price of their labour-power. To this extent the capitalists
have paid for that constituent part of the value of their commodity-product
which is equal to the variable capital expended in the form of
money. They are, for this reason, the owners of this portion of the
commodity-product as well. But that part of the working-class which is
employed by them does not buy the means of production created by it;
these labourers buy articles of consumption produced by II. Hence the
variable capital advanced by the capitalists of I in the payment of labour-power
does not return to them directly. It passes by means of purchases
made by the labourers into the hands of the capitalist producers of the
commodities necessary for and within the reach of working folks; in
other words, it passes into the hands of capitalists II. And not until these
expend the money in the purchase of means of production does it return
by this circuitous route into the hands of capitalists I.
It follows that, on the basis of simple reproduction, the sum of the
values of v + s of the commodity-capital of I (and therefore a
corresponding proportional part of the total commodity-product of I)
must be equal to the constant capital IIc, which is likewise taken as a
proportional part of the total commodity-product of department II; or
I(v + s) = IIc.