XI. Replacement of the Fixed Capital

In the analysis of the exchanges of the annual reproduction the
following presents great difficulty. If we take the simplest form in which
the matter may be presented, we get:

I) 4,000c + 1,000v + l,000s +

II) 2,000c + 500v + 500s = 9,000.

This resolves itself finally into:

4,000 Ic + 2,000 IIc + 1,000 Iv + 500 IIv + l,000 Is + 500 IIs

= 6,000c + 1,500v + 1,500s = 9,000

One portion of the value of the constant capital, which consists of
instruments of labour in the strict meaning of the term (as a distinct
section of the means of production) is transferred from the instruments
of labour to the product of labour (the commodity); these instruments of
labour continue to function as elements of the productive capital, doing
so in their old bodily form. It is their wear and tear, the depreciation
gradually experienced by them during their continual functioning for a
definite period which re-appears as an element of value of the commodities
produced by means of them, which is transferred from the
instrument of labour to the product of labour. With regard to the annual
reproduction therefore only such component parts of fixed capital will
from the first be given consideration as last longer than a year. If they
are completely worn out within the year they must be completely
replaced and renewed by the annual reproduction, and the point at issue
does not concern them at all. It may happen in the case of machines
and other more durable forms of fixed capital ; and it frequently does
happen ; that certain parts of them must be replaced lock, stock and
barrel within one year, although the building or machine in its entirety
lasts much longer. These parts belong in one category with the elements
of fixed capital which are to be replaced within one year.

This element of the value of commodities must not be confused with
the costs of repair. If a commodity is sold, this value-element is turned
into money, the same as all others. But after it has been turned into
money, its difference from the other elements of value becomes
apparent. The raw and auxiliary materials consumed in the production of
commodities must be replaced in kind in order that the reproduction of
commodities may begin (or that the process of production of
commodities in general may be continuous). The labour-power spent on
them must also be renewed by fresh labour-power. Consequently the
money realised on the commodities must be continually reconverted into
these elements of the productive capital, from the money-form into the
commodity-form. It does not alter the matter if raw and auxiliary
materials for instance are bought at certain intervals in larger
quantities ; so that they constitute productive supplies ; and need not be
bought anew during certain periods; and therefore ; as long as they
last ; the money coming in through the sale of commodities, inasmuch
as it is meant for this purpose, may accumulate and this portion of constant
capital thus appears temporarily as money-capital whose active
function has been suspended. It is not a revenue-capital; it is productive
capital suspended in the form of money. The renewal of the means of
production must go on all the time, although the form of this renewal ; 
with reference to the circulation ; may vary. The new purchases, the
circulation operation by which they are renewed or replaced, may take
place at more or at less prolonged intervals: then a large amount may be
invested at one stroke, compensated by a corresponding productive
supply. Or the intervals between purchases may be small: then follows a
rapid succession of money expenditures in small doses, of small
productive supplies. This does not alter the matter itself. The same
applies to labour-power. Where production is carried on continuously
throughout the year on the same scale ; continuous replacement of
consumed labour-power by new. Where work is seasonable, or different
portions of labour are applied at different periods, as in agriculture ; 
corresponding purchases of labour-power, now in small, now in large
amounts. But the money proceeds realised from the sale of
commodities, so far as they turn into money that part of the commodity-value
which is equal to the wear and tear of fixed capital, are not re-converted
into that component part of the productive capital whose
diminution in value they cover. They settle down beside the productive
capital and persist in the form of money. This precipitation of money is
repeated, until the period of reproduction consisting of great or small
numbers of years has elapsed, during which the fixed element of
constant capital continues to function in the process of production in its
old bodily form. As soon as the fixed element, such as buildings,
machinery, etc., has been worn out, and can no longer function in the
process of production, its value exists alongside it fully replaced by
money, by the sum of money precipitations, the values which had been
gradually transferred from the fixed capital to the commodities in whose
production it participated and which had assumed the form of money as
a result of the sale of these commodities. This money then serves to
replace the fixed capital (or its elements, since its various elements have
different durabilities) in kind and thus really to renew this component
part of the productive capital. This money is therefore the money-form of
a part of the constant capital-value, namely of its fixed part. The
formation of this hoard is thus itself an element of the capitalist process
of reproduction; it is the reproduction and storing up ; in the form of
money ; of the value of fixed capital, or its several elements, until the
fixed capital has ceased to live and in consequence has given off its full
value to the commodities produced and must now be replaced in kind.
But this money loses only its form of a hoard and hence resumes its activity
in the process of reproduction of capital brought about by the
circulation as soon as it is reconverted into new elements of fixed capital
to replace those that died off.

Just as simple commodity circulation is in no way identical with a
bare exchange of products, the conversion of the annual commodity-product
can in no way resolve itself into a mere unmediated mutual
exchange of its various components. Money plays a specific role in it,
which finds expression particularly in the manner in which the value of
the fixed capital is reproduced. (How different the matter would present
itself if production were collective and no longer possessed the form of
commodity production is left to a later analysis.)

Should we now return to our fundamental scheme, we shall get the
following for class II: 2,000c + 500v + 500s. All the articles of consumption produced in the course of the year are in that case equal in
value to 3,000; and every one of the different commodity elements in
the total sum of the commodities is composed, so far as its value is
concerned, of ⅔c + 1/6v + 1/6s, or, in percentages, 66⅔c + 16⅔v +
16⅔s. The various kinds of commodities of class II may contain different proportions of constant capital. Likewise the fixed portion of the constant
capital may be different. The duration of the parts of the fixed capital
and hence the annual wear and tear, or that portion of value which they
transfer pro rata to the commodities in the production of which they
participate, may also differ. But that is immaterial here. As to the
process of social reproduction, it is only a question of exchange between
classes II and I. These two classes here confront each other only in their
social, mass relations. Therefore the proportional magnitude of part c of
the value of commodity-product II (the only one of consequence in the
question now being discussed) gives the average proportion if all the
branches of production classed under II are embraced.

Every kind of commodity (and they are largely the same kinds) whose
aggregate value is classed under 2,000c + 500v + 500s is therefore equal in value to 66⅔%c + 16⅔%v + 16⅔%s. This applies to every
100 of the commodities, whether classed under c, v or s.

The commodities in which the 2,000c are incorporated may be
further divided, in value, into:

1) 1,333⅓c + 333⅓v + 333⅓s = 2,000c;

similarly 500v may be divided into:

2) 333⅓c + 83⅓v + 83⅓s = 500v;

and finally 500s may be divided into:

3) 333⅓c + 83⅓v + 83⅓s = 500s

Now, if we add the c's in 1), 2), and 3) we get 1,333⅓c + 333⅓c + 333⅓c = 2,000. Furthermore 333⅓v + 83⅓v + 83⅓v = 500.

And the same in the case of s. The addition gives the same total value of
3,000, as above.

The entire constant capital-value contained in the commodity mass II
representing a value of 3,000 is therefore comprised in 2,000c, and
neither 500v nor 500s hold an atom of it. The same is true of v and s respectively.

In other words, the entire share of commodity mass II that represents
constant capital-value and therefore is reconvertible either into its bodily
or its money-form, exists in 2,000c. Everything referring to the exchange
of the constant value of commodities II is therefore confined to the
movement of 2,000 IIc. And this exchange can be made only with I
(1,000v + 1,000s).

Similarly, as regards class I, everything that bears in the exchange of
the constant capital-value of that class is to be confined to a
consideration of 4,000 Ic.