I. The Subject Investigated

The direct process of the production of capital is its labour and self-expansion process, the process whose result is the commodity-product and whose compelling motive is the production of surplus-value.

The process of reproduction of capital comprises this direct process
of production as well as the two phases of the circulation process proper,
i.e., the entire circuit which, as a periodic process ; a process which
constantly repeats itself in definite periods ; constitutes the turnover
of capital.

Whether we study the circuit in the form of M ... M' or that of
P ... P, the direct process of production P itself always forms but one
link in this circuit. In the one form it appears as a promoter of the process
of circulation; in the other the process of circulation appears as its
promoter. Its continuous renewal, the continuous re-appearance of capital
as productive capital, is in either case determined by its transformations
in the process of circulation. On the other hand the continuously renewed
process of production is the condition of the transformations which the
capital undergoes ever anew in the sphere of circulation, of its alternate
appearance as money-capital and commodity-capital.

Every individual capital forms, however, but an individualised
fraction, a fraction endowed with individual life, as it were, of the aggregate
social capital, just as every individual capitalist is but an individual
element of the capitalist class. The movement of the social capital consists
of the totality of the movements of its individualised fractional parts,
the turnovers of the individual capitals. Just as the metamorphosis of
the individual commodity is a link in the series of metamorphoses of the
commodity-world ; the circulation of commodities ; so the metamorphosis of the individual capital, its turnover, is a link in the circuit described
by social capital.

This total process comprises both the productive consumption (the
direct process of production) together with the conversions of form (materially
considered, exchanges) which bring it about, and the individual consumption
together with the conversions of form or exchanges by which it is brought
about. It includes on the one hand the conversion of variable capital into
labour-power, and therefore the incorporation of labour-power in the process
of capitalist production. Here the labourer acts as the seller of his commodity,
labour-power, and the capitalist as its buyer. But on the other hand the
sale of the commodities embraces also their purchase by the working-class
appears as buyer and the capitalists as sellers of commodities to the labourers.

The circulation of the commodity-capital includes the circulation
of surplus-value, hence also the purchases and sales by which the capitalist
effect their individual consumption, the consumption of surplus-value.

The circuit of the individual capitals in their aggregate as social
capital, hence considered in its totality, comprises not only the circulation
of capital but also the general circulation of commodities. The latter
can originally consist of only two components: 1) The circuit of capital
proper and 2) the circuit of the commodities which enter into individual
consumption, consequently of the commodities for which the labourer expends
his wages and the capitalist his surplus-value (or a part of it). At any
rate, the circuit of capital comprises also the circulation of the surplus-value,
since the latter is a part of the commodity capital, and likewise the conversion
of the variable capital into labour-power, the payment of wages. But the
expenditure of this surplus-value and wages for commodities does not form
a link in the circulation of capital, although at least the expenditure
of wages is essential for this circulation.

In Volume I the process of capitalist production was analysed as
an individual act as well as a process of reproduction: the production
of surplus-value and the production of capital itself. The changes of form
and substance experienced by capital in the sphere of circulation were
assumed without dwelling upon them. It was presupposed that on the one
hand the capitalist sells the product at its value and on the other that
he finds within the sphere of circulation the objective means of production
for restarting or continuing the process. The only act within the sphere
of circulation on which we have dwelt was the purchase and sale of labour-power
as the fundamental condition of capitalist production.

In the first part of this Book II, the various forms were considered
which capital assumes its circular movement, and the various forms of this
movement itself. The circulation time must now be added to the working
times discussed in Volume I.

In the second Part, the circuit was studied as being periodic,
i.e., as a turnover. It was shown on the one hand in what manner the various
constituents of capital (fixed and circulating) accomplish the circuit
of forms in different periods of time and in different ways; on the other
hand the circumstances were examined by which the different lengths of
the working period and circulation period are conditioned. The influence
was shown which the period of the circuit and the different proportions
of its component parts exert upon the dimensions of the production process
itself and upon the annual rate of surplus-value. Indeed, while it was
the successive forms continually assumed and discarded by capital in its
circuit that were studied in Part I, it was shown in Part II how a capital
of a given magnitude is simultaneously, though in varying proportions,
divided, within this flow and succession of forms, into different forms:
productive capital, money-capital, and commodity-capital, so that they
not only alternate with one another, but different portions of the total
capital-value are constantly side by side and function in these different
states. Especially money-capital came forward with distinctive features
not shown in Volume I. Certain laws were found according to which diverse
large components of a given capital must be continually advanced and renewed
; depending on the conditions of the turnover ; in the form of money-capital in order to keep a productive capital of a given size constantly functioning.

But in both the first and the second Parts it was always only
a question of some individual capital, of the movement of some individualised
part of social capital.

However the circuits of the individual capitals intertwine, presuppose
and necessitate one another, and form, precisely in this interlacing, the
movement of the total social capital. Just as in the simple circulation
of commodities the total metamorphosis of a commodity appeared as a link
in the series of metamorphoses of the world of commodities, so now the
metamorphosis of the individual capital appears as a link in the series
of metamorphoses of the social capital. But while simple commodity circulation
by no means necessarily comprises the circulation of capital ; since it
may take place on the basis of non-capitalist production ; the circuit
of the aggregate social capital, as was noted, comprises also the commodity
circulation lying outside the circuit of individual capital, i.e., the
circulation of commodities which do not represent capital.

We have now to study the process of circulation (which in its
entirety is a form of the process of reproduction) of the individual capitals
as components of the aggregate social capital, that is to say, the process
of circulation of this aggregate social capital.