I. First Stage. M ; C [2]

M ; C represents the conversion of a sum of money into a sum of commodities;
the purchaser transforms his money into commodities, the sellers transform
their commodities into money. What renders this act of the general circulation
of commodities simultaneously a functionally definite section in independent
circuit of some individual capital is primarily not the form of the act
but its material content, the specific use-character of the commodities
which change places with the money. These commodities are on the one hand
means of production, on the other labour-power, material and personal factors
in the production of commodities whose specific nature must of course correspond
to the special kind of articles to be manufactured. If we call labour-power
L, and the means of production MP, then the sum of commodities to be bought,
C, is equal to L + MP, or more briefly C<LMP.
 M ; C, considered as to its substance is therefore represented by M ; C<LMP, that is to say M ; C is composed of M ; L and M ; MP. The sum of money M is separated into two parts, one of which buys labour-power, the other means of production. These two series of purchases belong to entirely different markets, the one to the commodity-market proper, the other to the labour-market.

Aside from this qualitative division of the sum of commodities into which M is transformed, the formula M ; C<LMP also represents a most characteristic quantitative relation.

We know that the value, or price, of labour-power is paid to its
owner, who offers it for sale as a commodity, in the form of wages, that
is to say as the price of a sum of labour containing surplus-labour. For
instance if the daily value of labour-power is equal to the product of
five hours labour valued at three shillings, this sum figures in the contract
between the buyer and seller as the price, or wages, for, say, ten hours
of labour. If such a contract is made for instance with 50 labourers, they
are supposed to work altogether 500 hours per day for the purchaser, and
one half of this time, or 250 hours equal to 25 days of labour of 10 hours
each, represents nothing but surplus labour. The quantity and the volume
of the means of production to be purchased must be sufficient for the utilisation
of this mass of labour.

M ; C<LMP,
then, does not merely express the qualitative relation indicating that a certain sum of money, say &pound;422, is exchanged for a corresponding sum of means of production and labour-power, but also a quantitative relation between L, the part of the money spent
for labour-power, and MP, the part spent for means of production. This
relation is determined at the outset by the quantity of excess labour,
of surplus-labour to be expended by a certain number of labourers.

If for instance in a spinning-mill the weekly wage of its 50 labourers
amounts to &pound;50, &pound;372 must be spent for means of production,
if this is the value of the means of production which a weekly labour of
3,000 hours, 1,500 of which are surplus-labour, transforms into yarn.

It is immaterial here how much additional value in the form of
means of production is required in the various lines of industry by the
utilisation of additional labour. The point merely is that the part of
the money spent for means of production ; the means of production bought
in M ; MP ; must absolutely suffice, i.e., must at the outset be calculated
accordingly, must be procured in corresponding proportion. To put it another
way, the quantity of means of production must suffice to absorb the amount
of labour, to be transformed by it into products. If the means of production
at hand were insufficient, the excess labour at the disposal of the purchaser
could not be utilised; his right to dispose of it is futile. If there were
more means of production than available labour, they would not be saturated
with labour, would not be transformed into products.

As soon as M ; C<LMP is completed, the purchaser has at his disposal more than simply the means of production and labour-power required for the production of some useful article. He
disposes of a greater capacity to render labour-power fluent, or a greater
quantity of labour than is necessary for the replacement of the value of
this labour-power, and he has at the same time the means of production
requisite for the realisation or materialisation of this quantity of labour.
In other words, he has at his disposal the factors making for the production
of articles of a greater value than that of the elements of production ; the factors of production of a mass of commodities containing surplus-value.
The value advanced by him in money-form has now assumed a bodily form in
which it can be incarnated as a value generating surplus-value (in the
shape of commodities). In brief, value exists here in the condition or
form of productive capital, which has the factor of creating value
and surplus-value. Let us call capital in this form P.

Now the value of P is equal to that of L + MP, it is equal to
M exchanged for L and MP. M is the same capital-value as P, only it has
a different mode of existence, it is capital-value in the state or form
of money ; money-capital.

M ; C<LMP, or its general form M ; C, a sum of purchases of commodities, an act of the general circulation of commodities, is therefore at the same time ; as a stage in the independent circuit of capital ; a transformation of capital-value from its money-form into its productive form. More briefly, it is the transformation of money-capital into productive capital. In the diagram of the circuit which we
are here discussing, money appears as the first depository of capital-value,
and money-capital therefore represents the form in which capital is advanced.

Capital in the form of money-capital is in a state in which it
can perform the functions of money, in the present case the functions of
a universal means of purchase and universal means of payment. (The last-named
inasmuch as labour-power though first bought is not paid for until it has
been put into operation. To the extent that the means of production are
not found ready on the market but have to be ordered first, money in M ; MP
likewise serves as a means of payment.) This capacity is not due to the
fact that money-capital is capital but that it is money.

On the other hand capital-value in the form of money cannot perform
any other functions but those of money. What turns the money-functions
into functions of capital is the definite role they play in the movement
of capital, and therefore also the interrelation of the stage in which
these functions are performed with the other stages of the circuit of capital.
Take, for instance, the case with which we are here dealing. Money is here
converted into commodities the combination of which represents the bodily
form of productive capital, and this form already contains latently, potentially,
the result of the process of capitalist production.

A part of the money performing the function of money-capital in
M ; C<LMP assumes, by consummating the act of circulation, a function in which it loses its capital character but preserves its money-character. The circulation of money-capital M is divided into
M ; MP and M ; L, into the purchase of means of production and the purchase of labour-power. Let us consider the last-named process by itself. M ; L
is the purchase of labour-power by the capitalist. It is also the sale
of labour-power ; we may here say of labour, since the form of wages is
assumed ; by the laborer who owns it. What is M ; C ( = M ; L) for the buyer is here, as in every other purchase, L ; M ( = C ; M) for the seller
(the laborer). It is the sale of his labour-power. This is the first stage
of circulation, or the first metamorphosis, of the commodity (Buch I, Kap.
III, 2a).[English edition: Ch. III, 2a ; Ed.] It is for the seller
of labour a transformation of his commodity into the money-form. The laborer
spends the money so obtained gradually for a number of commodities required
for the satisfaction of his needs, for articles of consumption. The complete
circulation of his commodity therefore appears as L ; M ; C, that is to
say first as L ; M ( = C ; M) and secondly as M ; C; hence in the general form of the simple circulation of commodities, C ; M ; C. Money is in this case merely a passing means of circulation, a mere medium in the exchange
of one commodity for another.

M ; L is the characteristic moment in the transformation of money-capital
into productive capital, because it is the essential condition for the
real transformation of value advanced in the form of money into capital,
into a value producing surplus-value. M ; MP is necessary only for the
purpose of realising the quantity of labour bought in the process M ; L,
which was discussed from this point of view in Book I, Part II, under the
head of "The Transformation of Money into Capital." We shall have to consider the matter at this point also from another angle, relating especially to
money-capital the form in which capital manifests itself.

Generally M ; L is regarded as characteristic of the capitalist
mode of production. However not at all for the reason given above, that
the purchase of labour-power represents a contract of purchase which stipulates
for the delivery of a quantity of labour in excess of that needed to replace
the price of the labour-power, the wages; hence delivery of surplus-labour,
the fundamental condition for the capitalisation of the value advanced,
or for the production of surplus-value, which is the same thing. On the
contrary, it is so regarded because of its form, since money in the form
of wages buys labour, and this is the characteristic mark of the money
system.

Nor is it the irrationality of the form which is taken as characteristic.
On the contrary, one overlooks the irrational. The irrationality consists
in the fact that labour itself as a value-creating element cannot have
any value, nor can therefore any definite amount of labour have any value
expressed in its price, in its equivalence to a definite quantity of money.
But we know that wages are but a disguised form, a form in which for instance
the price of one day's labour-power presents itself as the price of the
labour rendered fluent by this labour-power in one day. The value produced
by this labour-power in, say, six hours of labour is thus expressed as
the value of twelve hours' functioning or operation of the labour-power.

M ; L is regarded as the characteristic feature, the hallmark
of the so-called money system, because labour there appears as the commodity
of its owner, and money therefore as the buyer ; hence on account of the
money-relation (i.e., the sale and purchase of human activity). Money however
appears very early as a buyer of so-called services, without the transformation
of M into money-capital, and without any change in the general character
of the economic system.

It makes no difference to money into what sort of commodities
it is transformed. It is the universal equivalent of all commodities which
show, if only by their prices, that ideally they represent a certain sum
of money, anticipate their transformation into money, and do not acquire
the form in which they may be converted into use-values for their owners
until they change places with money. Once labour-power has come into the
market as the commodity of its owner and its sale takes the form of payment
for labour, assumes the shape of wages, its purchase and sale is no more
startling than the purchase and sale of any other commodity. The characteristic
thing is not that the commodity labour-power is purchasable but that labour-power
appears as a commodity.

By means of M ; C<LMP, the transformation of money-capital into productive capital, the capitalist effects the combination of the objective and personal factors of production so far as they consist of commodities. If money is transformed into productive capital for the
first time or if it performs for the first time the function of money-capital
for its owner, he must begin by buying means of production, such as buildings,
machinery, etc., before he buys any labour-power. For as soon as he compels
labour-power to act in obedience to his sway, he must have means of production
to which he can apply it as labour-power.

This is the capitalist's presentation of the case.

The labourer's case is as follows: The productive application
of his labour-power is not possible until it is sold and brought into connection
with means of production. Before its sale, labour-power exists therefore
separately from the means of production, from the material conditions of
its application. In this state of separation it cannot be used either directly
for the production of use-values for its owner or for the production of
commodities, by the sale of which he could live. But from the moment that
as a result of its sale it is brought into connection with means of production,
it forms part of the productive capital of its purchaser, the same as the
means of production.

True, in the act M ; L the owner of money and the owner of labour-power
enter only into the relation of buyer and seller, confront one another
only as money-owner and commodity-owner. In this respect they enter merely
into a money-relation. Yet at the same time the buyer appears also from
the outset in the capacity of an owner of means of production, which are
the material conditions for the productive expenditure of labour-power
by its owner. In other words, these means of production are in opposition
to the owner of the labour-power, being property of another. On the other
hand the seller of labour faces its buyer as labour-power of another which
must be made to do his bidding, must be integrated into his capital, in
order that it may really become productive capital. The class relation
between capitalist and wage-laborer therefore exists, is presupposed from
the moment the two face each other in the act M ; L (L ; M on the part
of the laborer). It is a purchase and sale, a money-relation, but a purchase
and sale in which the buyer is assumed to be a capitalist and the seller
a wage-laborer. And this relation arises out of the fact that the conditions
required for the realisation of labour-power, viz., means of subsistence
and means of production, are separated from the owner of labour-power,
being the property of another.

We are not concerned here with the origin of this separation.
It exists as soon as M ; L goes on. The thing which interests us here is
this: If M ; L appears here as a function of money-capital or money as
the form of existence of capital, the sole reason that money here assumes
the role of a means of paying for a useful human activity or service; hence
by no means in consequence of the function of money as a means of payment.
Money can be expended in this form only because labour-power finds itself
in a state of separation from its means of production (including the means
of subsistence as means of production of the labour-power itself), and
because this separation can be overcome only by the sale of the labour-power
to the owner of the means of production; because therefore the functioning
of labour-power, which is not at all limited to the quantity of labour
required for the reproduction of its own price, is likewise the concern
of its buyer. The capital-relation during the process of production arises
only because it is inherent in the act of circulation, in the different
fundamental economic conditions in which buyer and seller confront each
other, in their class relation. It is not money which by its nature creates
this relation; it is rather the existence of this relation which permits
of the transformation of a mere money-function into a capital-function.

In the conception of money-capital (for the time being we deal
with the latter only within the confines of the special function in which
it faces us here) two errors run parallel to each other or cross each other.
In the first place the functions performed by capital-value in its capacity
as money-capital, which it can perform precisely owing to its money-form,
are erroneously derived from its character as capital, whereas they are
due only to the money-form of capital-value, to its form of appearance
as money. In the second place, on the contrary, the specific content of
the money-function, which renders it simultaneously a capital-function,
is traced to the nature of money (money being here confused with capital),
while the money function premises social conditions, such as are here indicated
by the act M ; L, which do not at all exist in the mere circulation of
commodities and the corresponding circulation of money.

The purchase and sale of slaves is formally also a purchase and
sale of commodities. But money cannot perform this function without the
existence of slavery. If slavery exists, then money can be invested in
the purchase of slaves. On the other hand the mere possession of money
cannot make slavery possible.

In order that the sale of one's own labour-power (in the form
of the sale of one's own labour or in the form of wages) may constitute
not an isolated phenomenon but a socially decisive premise for the production
of commodities, in order that money-capital may therefore perform, on a
social scale, the above-discussed function M ; C<LMP, historical processes are assumed by which the original connection of the means of production with labour-power was dissolved ; processes in consequence of which the mass of the people, the labourers, have, as non-owners, come face to face with non-labourers as the owners of these means of production. It makes no difference in this case whether the connection before its dissolution was such in form that the laborer, being himself a means of production,
belonged to the other means of production or whether he was their owner.

What lies back of M ; C<LMP is distribution; not distribution in the ordinary meaning of a distribution of articles of consumption, but the distribution of the elements of production itself,
the material factors of which are concentrated on one side, and labour-power,
isolated, on the other.

The means of production, the material part of productive capital,
must therefore face the laborer as such, as capital, before the act M ; L
can become a universal, social one.

We have seen on previous occasions [English edition: Karl Marx,
Capital, Vol. I, Part VII, Moscow, 1954. ; Ed.] that in
its further development capitalist production, once it is established,
not only reproduces this separation but extends its scope further and further
until it becomes the prevailing condition. However, there is still another
side to this question. In order that capital may be able to arise and take
control of production, a definite stage in the development of trade is
assumed. This applies therefore also to the circulation of commodities,
and hence to the production of commodities; for no articles can enter circulation
as commodities unless they are produced for sale, hence as commodities.
But the production of commodities does not become the normal, dominant
type of production until capitalist production serves as its basis.

The Russian landowners, who as a result of the so-called emancipation
of the peasants are now compelled to carry on agriculture with the help
of wage-labourers instead of the forced labour of serfs, complain about
two things: First, about the lack of money-capital. They say for instance
that comparatively large sums must be paid to wage-labourers before the
crops are sold, and just then there is a dearth of ready cash, the prime
condition. Capital in the form of money must always be available, particularly
for the payment of wages, before production can be carried on capitalistically.
But the landowners may take hope. Everything comes to those who wait, and
in due time the industrial capitalist will have at his disposal not alone
his own money but also that of others.

The second complaint is more characteristic. It is to the effect
that even if one has money, not enough labourers are to be had at any time.
The reason is that the Russian farm-laborer, owing to the common ownership
of land in the village community, has not yet been fully separated from
his means of production and hence is not yet a "free wage-laborer" in the
full sense of the word. But the existence of the latter on a social scale
is a sine qua non for M ; C, the conversion of money into commodities,
to be able to represent the transformation of money-capital into productive
capital.

It is therefore quite clear that the formula for the circuit of
money-capital, M ; C ... C' ; M', is the matter-of-course form of the circuit
of capital only on the basis of already developed capitalist production,
because it presupposes the existence of a class of wage-labourers on a
social scale. We have seen that capitalist production does not only create
commodities and surplus-value, but also reproduces to an ever increasing
extent the class of wage-labourers, into whom it transforms the vast majority
of direct producers. Since the first condition for its realisation is the
permanent existence of a class of wage-labourers, M ; C ... P ... C' ; M'
presupposes a capital in the form of productive capital, and hence the
form of the circuit of productive capital.