II. Accumulation and Reproduction on an Extended Scale

Since the proportions which the expansion of the productive process
may assume are not arbitrary but prescribed by technology, the realised
surplus-value, though intended for capitalisation, frequently can only
by dint of several successive circuits attain such a size (and until then
must therefore be accumulated) as will suffice for its effective functioning
as additional capital or for entrance into the circuit of functioning capital-value.
Surplus-value thus congeals into a hoard and in this form constitutes latent
money-capital ; latent because it cannot act as capital so long as it
persists in the money-form. [6a] The formation of a
hoard thus appears here as a factor included in the process of capitalist
accumulation, accompanying it but nevertheless essentially differing from
it; for the process of reproduction itself is not expanded by the formation
of latent money-capital. On the contrary, latent money-capital is formed
here because the capitalist producer cannot directly expand the scale of
his production. If he sells his surplus-product to a producer of gold or
silver, who puts new gold or silver into circulation or, what amounts to
the same thing, to a merchant who imports additional gold or silver from
foreign countries for a part of the national surplus-product, then his
latent money-capital forms an increment of the national gold or silver
hoard. In all other cases, the &pound;78 for instance, which were a circulating
medium in the hands of the purchaser, assume only the form of a hoard in
the hands of the capitalist. Hence all that has taken place is a different
distribution of the national gold or silver hoard.

If in the transaction of our capitalist the money serves as a
means of payment (the commodities having to be paid for by the buyer on
longer or shorter terms), then the surplus-product intended for capitalisation
is not transformed into money but into creditor's claims, into titles of
ownership of an equivalent which the buyer may already have in his possession
or which he may expect to possess. It does not enter into the reproductive
process of the circuit any more than does money in invested in interest-bearing
securities, etc., although it may enter into the circuits of other individual
industrial capitals.

The entire character of capitalist production is determined by
the self-expansion of the advanced capital-value, that is to say, in the
first instance by the production of as much surplus-value as possible;
in the second place however (see Buch I, Kap. XXII) [English edition: Ch.
XXIV. ; Ed.] by the production of capital, hence by the transformation of surplus-value into capital. Accumulation, or production on an extended
scale, which appears as a means for constantly more expanded production
of surplus-value ; hence for the enrichment of the capitalist, as his
personal aim ; and is comprised in the general tendency of capitalist
production, becomes later, however, as was shown in Book I, by virtue of
its development, a necessity for every individual capitalist. The constant
augmentation of his capital becomes a condition of its preservation. But
we need not revert more fully to what was previously expounded.

We considered first simple reproduction, assuming that the entire
surplus-value is spent as revenue. In reality under normal conditions a
part of the surplus-value must always be spent as revenue, and another
part must be capitalised. And it is quite immaterial whether a certain
surplus-value produced in any particular period is entirely consumed or
entirely capitalised. On the average ; the general formula can represent
only the average movement ; both cases occur. But in order not to complicate
the formula, it is better to assume that the entire surplus-value is accumulated.
The formula: 
P ... C' ; M' ; C'<LMP ... P' stands for productive capital, which is reproduced on an enlarged scale and with greater value, and which as augmented productive capital begins its second
circuit, or, what amounts to the same, renews its first circuit. As soon
as this second circuit is begun, we once more have P as the starting-point;
only this P is a larger productive capital than the first P was. Hence,
if in the formula M ... M' the second circuit begins with M', M' functions
as M, as an advanced money-capital of a definite magnitude. It is a larger
money-capital than the one with which the first circular movement was opened,
but all reference to its augmentation by the capitalisation of surplus-value
ceases as soon as it assumes the function of advanced money-capital. This
origin is expunged in its form of money-capital, which begins its circuit.
This also applies to P' as soon as it functions as the starting-point of
a new circuit.

If we compare P ... P' with M ... M', or with the first circuit,
we find that they have not the same significance at all. M ... M' taken
by itself as an isolated circuit, expresses only that M, the money-capital
(or industrial capital in its circuit as money-capital), is money generating
money, value generating value, in other words, produces surplus-value.
But in the P circuit the process of producing surplus-value is already
completed upon the termination of the first stage, the process of production,
and after going through the second stage (the first stage of the circulation),
C' ; M', the capital-value plus surplus-value already exist as realised
money-capital, as M', which appeared as the last extreme in the first circuit.
That surplus-value has been produced is depicted in the first-considered
formula P ... P (see expanded formula, [M ; C<LMP ... P ... (C + c) - (M + m)]) by c ; m ; c, which, in its second stage, falls outside of the circulation of capital and represents the circulation of surplus-value
as revenue. In this form, where the entire movement is represented by P
... P, where consequently there is no difference in value between the two
extremes, the self-expansion of the advanced value the production of surplus-value,
is therefore represented in the same way as in M ... M', except that the
act C' ; M', which appears as the last stage in M ... M', and as the second
stage of the circuit, serves as the first stage of the circulation in P ... P.

In P ... P', P' does not indicate that the surplus-value has been
produced but that the produced surplus-value has been capitalised, hence
that capital has been accumulated and that therefore P', in contrast to
P, consists of the original capital-value plus the value of the capital
accumulated because of the capital-value's movement.

M', as the simple close of M ... M', and also C', as it appears
within all these circuits, do not if taken by themselves express the movement
but its result: the self-expansion of capital-value realised in the form
of commodities or money, and hence, capital-value as M plus m, or C plus
c, as a relation of capital-value to its surplus-value, as its offspring.
They express this result as various circulation forms of the self-expanded
capital-value. But neither in the form of C' nor of M' is the self-expansion
which has taken place itself a function of money-capital or of commodity-capital.
As special, differentiated forms, modes of existence corresponding to special
functions of industrial capital, money-capital can perform only money-functions
and commodity-capital only commodity-functions, the difference between
them being merely that between money and commodity. Similarly industrial
capital in its form of productive capital can consist only of the same
elements as those of any other labour-process which creates products: on
the one hand objective conditions of labour (means of production), on the
other productively (purposively) functioning labour-power. Just as industrial
capital can exist in the sphere of production only in a composition which
meets the requirements of the production process in general, hence also
of the non-capitalist production process, so it can exist in the sphere
of circulation only in the two forms corresponding to it,
viz., that of a commodity and of money. But just as the totality of the
elements of production announces itself at the outset as productive capital
by the fact that the labour-power is labour-power that belongs to others
and that the capitalist purchased it from its proprietor, just as he purchased
his means of production from other commodity-owners; just as therefore
the process of production itself appears as a productive function of industrial
capital, so money and commodities appear as forms of circulation of the
same industrial capital, hence their functions appear as the functions
of circulation, which either introduce the functions of productive capital
or emanate from them. Here the money-function and the commodity-function
are at the same time functions of commodity-capital, but solely because
they are interconnected as forms of functions which industrial capital
has to perform at the different stages of its circuit. It is therefore
wrong to attempt to derive the specific properties and functions which
characterise money as money and commodities as commodities from their quality
as capital, and it is equally wrong to derive on the contrary the properties
of productive capital from its mode of existence in means of production.

As soon as M' or C' have become fixed as M plus m or C plus c,
i.e., as the relation between the capital-value and surplus-value, its
offspring, this relation is expressed in both of them, in the first case
in the money-form, in the second case in the commodity-form, which does
not change matters in the least. Consequently this relation does not have
its origin in any properties or functions inherent in money as such or
commodities as such. In both cases the characteristic property of capital,
that of being a value, is expressed only as a result. C' is always the
product of the function of P, and M' is always merely the form of C' changed
in the circuit of industrial capital. As soon therefore as the realised
money-capital resumes its special function of money capital, it ceases
to express the capital-relation contained in M' = M plus m. After M ...
M' has been passed through and M' begins the circuit anew, it does not
figure as M even if the entire surplus-value contained in M' is capitalised.
The second circuit begins in our case with a money-capital of &pound;500,
instead of &pound;422, as in the first circuit. The money-capital, which
opens the circuit, is &pound;78 larger than before. This difference exists
on comparing the one circuit with the other, but no such comparison is
made within each particular circuit. The &pound;500 advanced as money-capital,
&pound;78 which formerly existed as surplus-value, do not play any other
role than would some other &pound;500 with which another capitalist inaugurates
his first circuit. The same happens in the circuit of the productive capital.
The increased P' acts as P on recommencing, just as P did in the simple
reproduction P ... P.

In the stage 
M' ; C'<LMP,
the augmented magnitude is indicated only by C', but not by L' or MP'.
Since C is the sum of L and MP, C' indicates sufficiently that the sum
of L and MP contained in it is greater than the original P. In the second
place, the terms L' and MP' would be incorrect, because we know that the
growth of capital involves a change in the constitution of its value and
that as this change progresses the value of MP increases, that of L always
decreasing relatively and often absolutely.