I. The Formulation of the Question

If we study the annual function of social capital ; hence of the total
capital of which the individual capitals form only fractional parts,
whose movement is their individual movement and simultaneously
integrating link in the movement of the total capital ; and its results, i.e.,
if we study the commodity-product furnished by society during the year,
then it must become apparent how the process of reproduction of the
social capital takes place, what characteristics distinguish this process of
reproduction from the process of reproduction of an individual capital,
and what characteristics are common to both. The annual product includes
those portions of the social product which replace capital, namely
social reproduction, as well as those which go to the consumption-fund,
those which are consumed by labourers and capitalists, hence both
productive and individual consumption. It comprises also the
reproduction (i.e., maintenance) of the capitalist class and the working-class,
and thus the reproduction of the capitalist character of the entire
process of production.

It is evidently the circulation formula

which we have to analyse, and consumption necessarily plays a role in
it; for the point of departure, C' = C + c, the commodity-capital
embraces both the constant and variable capital-value, and the surplus-value.
Its movement therefore includes both individual and productive
consumption. In the circuits M ; C ... P... C'; M' and P ... C'; M'; C ... P, the movement of the capital is the starting and finishing point. And of course this includes consumption, for the commodity, the product,
must be sold. When this has assumedly been done it is immaterial for
the movement of the individual capital what becomes of the
commodities subsequently. On the other hand in the movement of C' ...
C' the conditions of social reproduction are discernible precisely from the
fact that it must be shown what becomes of every portion of value of this
total product, C'. In this case the total process of reproduction includes
the process of consumption brought about by the circulation quite as
much as the process of reproduction of the capital itself.

For our present purpose this process of reproduction must be studied
from the point of view of the replacement of the value as well as the
substance of the individual component parts of C'. We cannot rest
content any longer, as we did in the analysis of the value of the product
of the individual capital, with the assumption that the individual
capitalist can first convert the component parts of his capital into money
by the sale of his commodities, and then reconvert them into productive
capital by renewed purchase of the elements of production in the
commodity-market. Inasmuch as those elements of production are by
nature material, they represent as much a constituent of the social
capital as the individual finished product, which is exchanged for them
and replaced by them. Contrariwise the movement of that portion of the
social commodity-product which is consumed by the labourer in
expending his wages, and by the capitalist in expending his surplus-value,
not only forms an integral part of the movement of the total
product but intermingles with the movements of the individual capitals,
and therefore this process cannot be explained by merely assuming it.

The question that confronts us directly is this: How is the capital
consumed in production replaced in value out of the annual product and
how does the movement of this replacement intertwine with the
consumption of the surplus-value by the capitalists and of the wages by
the labourers? It is then first a matter of reproduction on a simple scale.
It is furthermore assumed that products are exchanged at their values
and also that there is no revolution in the values of the component parts
of productive capital. The fact that prices diverge from values cannot,
however, exert any influence on the movements of the social capital. On
the whole, there is the same exchange of the same quantities of products,
although the individual capitalists are involved in value-relations no
longer proportional to their respective advances and to the quantities of
surplus-value produced singly by every one of them. As for revolutions in
value, they do not alter anything in the relations between the value-components
of the total annual product, provided they are universally
and evenly distributed. To the extent however that they are partially and
unevenly distributed, they represent disturbances which, in the first
place, can be understood as such only as far as they are regarded as
divergences from unchanged value-relations, but in the second place, once there is proof of the law according to which one portion of the value
of the annual product replaces constant, and another portion variable
capital, a revolution either in the value of the constant or that of the
variable capital would not alter anything in this law. It would change
merely the relative magnitudes of the portions of value which function in
the one or the other capacity, because other values would have taken
the places of the original ones.

So long as we looked upon the production of value and the value of
the product of capital individually, the bodily form of the commodities
produced was wholly immaterial for the analysis, whether it was
machines, for instance, corn, or looking glasses. It was always but a
matter of illustration, and any branch of production could have served
that purpose equally well. What we dealt with was the immediate
process of production itself, which presents itself at every point as the
process of some individual capital. So far as the reproduction of capital
was concerned, it was sufficient to assume that that portion of the
product in commodities which represents capital-value finds an
opportunity in the sphere of circulation to reconvert itself into its
elements of production and thus into its form of productive capital; just
as it sufficed to assume that both the labourer and the capitalist find in
the market those commodities on which they spend their wages and the
surplus-value. This merely formal manner of presentation is no longer
adequate in the study of the total social capital and of the value of its
products. The reconversion of one portion of the value of the product into
capital and the passing of another portion into the individual
consumption of the capitalist as well as the working-class form a
movement within the value of the product itself in which the result of the
aggregate capital finds expression; and this movement is not only a
replacement of value, but also a replacement in material and is therefore
as much bound up with the relative proportions of the value-components
of the total social product as with their use-value, their material shape.
Simple reproduction, reproduction on the same scale, appears as an
abstraction, inasmuch as on the one hand the absence of all
accumulation or reproduction on an extended scale is a strange
assumption in capitalist conditions, and on the other hand conditions of
production do not remain exactly the same in different years (and this is
assumed). The assumption is that a social capital of a given magnitude
produces the same quantity of commodity-value this year as last, and
supplies the same quantum of wants, although the forms of the
commodities may change in the process of reproduction. However, as far
as accumulation does take place, simple reproduction is always a part of
it, and can therefore be studied by itself, and is an actual factor of
accumulation. The value of the annual product may decrease, although
the quantity of use-values may remain the same; or the value may
remain the same although the quantity of the use-values may decrease;
or the quantity of value and of the reproduced use-values may decrease
simultaneously. All this amounts to reproduction taking place either
under more favourable conditions than before or under more difficult
ones, which may result in imperfect ; defective ; reproduction. All this
can refer only to the quantitative aspect of the various elements of
reproduction, not to the role which they play as reproducing capital or as
a reproduced revenue in the entire process.