I. THE TWO WORLD OUTLOOKS

Throughout the history of human knowledge, there have been two conceptions concerning the law of development of the universe, the metaphysical
conception and the dialectical conception, which form two opposing world
outlooks. Lenin said:

 The two basic (or two possible? or two historically observable?) conceptions
 of development (evolution) are: development as decrease and increase, as
 repetition, and development as a unity of opposites (the division
 of a unity into mutually exclusive opposites and their reciprocal relation).
 [3]

Here Lenin was referring to these two different world outlooks.

In China another name for metaphysics is hsuan-hsueh. For a long period
in history whether in China or in Europe, this way of thinking, which is
part and parcel of the idealist world outlook, occupied a dominant position
in human thought. In Europe, the materialism of the bourgeoisie in its early
days was also metaphysical. As the social economy of many European countries
advanced to the stage of highly developed capitalism, as the forces of
production, the class struggle and the sciences developed to a level
unprecedented in history, and as the industrial proletariat became the greatest
motive force in historical development, there arose the Marxist world outlook
of materialist dialectics. Then, in addition to open and barefaced reactionary
idealism, vulgar evolutionism emerged among the bourgeoisie to oppose materialist
dialectics.

The metaphysical or vulgar evolutionist world outlook sees things as isolated,
static and one-sided. It regards all things in the universe, their forms
and their species, as eternally isolated from one another and immutable.
Such change as there is can only be an increase or decrease in quantity or
a change of place. Moreover, the cause of such an increase or decrease or
change of place is not inside things but outside them, that is, the motive
force is external. Metaphysicians hold that all the different kinds of things
in the universe and all their characteristics have been the same ever since
they first came into being. All subsequent changes have simply been increases
or decreases in quantity. They contend that a thing can only keep on repeating
itself as the same kind of thing and cannot change into anything different.
In their opinion, capitalist exploitation, capitalist competition, the
individualist ideology of capitalist society, and so on, can all be found
in ancient slave society, or even in primitive society, and will exist for
ever unchanged. They ascribe the causes of social development to factors
external to society, such as geography and climate. They search in an
over-simplified way outside a thing for the causes of its development, and
they deny the theory of materialist dialectics which holds that development
arises from the contradictions inside a thing. Consequently they can explain
neither the qualitative diversity of things, nor the phenomenon of one quality
changing into another. In Europe, this mode of thinking existed as mechanical
materialism in the 17th and 18th centuries and as vulgar evolutionism at
the end of the 19th and the beginning of the 20th centuries. In China, there
was the metaphysical thinking exemplified in the saying "Heaven changeth
not, likewise the Tao changeth not", [4] and it was supported
by the decadent feudal ruling classes for a long time. Mechanical materialism
and vulgar evolutionism, which were imported from Europe in the last hundred
years, are supported by the bourgeoisie.

As opposed to the metaphysical world outlook, the world outlook of materialist
dialectics holds that in order to understand the development of a thing we
should study it internally and in its relations with other things; in other
words, the development of things should be seen as their internal and necessary
self-movement, while each thing in its movement is interrelated with and
interacts on the things around it. The fundamental cause of the development
of a thing is not external but internal; it lies in the contradictoriness
within the thing. There is internal contradiction in every single thing,
hence its motion and development. Contradictoriness within a thing is the
fundamental cause of its development, while its interrelations and interactions
with other things are secondary causes. Thus materialist dialectics effectively
combats the theory of external causes, or of an external motive force, advanced
by metaphysical mechanical materialism and vulgar evolutionism. It is evident
that purely external causes can only give rise to mechanical motion, that
is, to changes in scale or quantity, but cannot explain why things differ
qualitatively in thousands of ways and why one thing changes into another.
As a matter of fact, even mechanical motion under external force occurs through
the internal contradictoriness of things. Simple growth in plants and animals,
their quantitative development, is likewise chiefly the result of their internal
contradictions. Similarly, social development is due chiefly not to external
but to internal causes. Countries with almost the same geographical and climatic
conditions display great diversity and unevenness in their development. Moreover,
great social changes may take place in one and the same country although
its geography and climate remain unchanged. Imperialist Russia changed into
the socialist Soviet Union, and feudal Japan, which had locked its doors
against the world, changed into imperialist Japan, although no change occurred
in the geography and climate of either country. Long dominated by feudalism,
China has undergone great changes in the last hundred years and is now changing
in the direction of a new China, liberated and-free, and yet no change has
occurred in her geography and climate. Changes do take place in the geography
and climate of the earth as a whole and in every part of it, but they are
insignificant when compared with changes in society; geographical and climatic
changes manifest themselves in terms of tens of thousands of years, while
social changes manifest themselves in thousands, hundreds or tens of years,
and even in a few years or months in times of revolution. According to
materialist dialectics, changes in nature are due chiefly to the development
of the internal contradictions in nature. Changes in society are due chiefly
to the development of the internal contradictions in society, that is, the
contradiction between the productive forces and the relations of production,
the contradiction between classes and the contradiction between the old and
the new; it is the development of these contradictions that pushes society
forward and gives the impetus for the supersession of the old society by
the new. Does materialist dialectics exclude external causes? Not at all.
It holds that external causes are the condition of change and internal causes
are the basis of change, and that external causes become operative through
internal causes. In a suitable temperature an egg changes into a chicken,
but no temperature can change a stone into a chicken, because each has a
different basis. There is constant interaction between the peoples of different
countries. In the era of capitalism, and especially in the era of imperialism
and proletarian revolution, the interaction and mutual impact of different
countries in the political, economic and cultural spheres are extremely great.
The October Socialist Revolution ushered in a new epoch in world history
as well as in Russian history. It exerted influence on internal changes in
the other countries in the world and, similarly and in a particularly profound
way, on internal changes in China. These changes, however, were effected
through the inner laws of development of these countries, China included.
In battle, one army is victorious and the other is defeated, both the victory
and the defeat are determined by internal causes. The one is victorious either
because it is strong or because of its competent generalship, the other is
vanquished either because it is weak or because of its incompetent generalship;
it is through internal causes that external causes become operative. In China
in 1927, the defeat of the proletariat by the big bourgeoisie came about
through the opportunism then to be found within the Chinese proletariat itself
(inside the Chinese Communist Party). When we liquidated this opportunism,
the Chinese revolution resumed its advance. Later, the Chinese revolution
again suffered severe setbacks at the hands of the enemy, because adventurism
had risen within our Party. When we liquidated this adventurism, our cause
advanced once again. Thus it can be seen that to lead the revolution to victory,
a political party must depend on the correctness of its own political line
and the solidity of its own organization.

The dialectical world outlook emerged in ancient times both in China and
in Europe. Ancient dialectics, however, had a somewhat spontaneous and naive
character; in the social and historical conditions then prevailing, it was
not yet able to form a theoretical system, hence it could not fully explain
the world and was supplanted by metaphysics. The famous German philosopher
Hegel, who lived in the late 18th and early 19th centuries, made most important
contributions to dialectics, but his dialectics was idealist. It was not
until Marx and Engels, the great protagonists of the proletarian movement,
had synthesized the positive achievements in the history of human knowledge
and, in particular, critically absorbed the rational elements of Hegelian
dialectics and created the great theory of dialectical and historical materialism
that an unprecedented revolution occurred in the history of human knowledge.
This theory was further developed by Lenin and Stalin. As soon as it spread
to China, it wrought tremendous changes in the world of Chinese thought.

This dialectical world outlook teaches us primarily how to observe and analyse
the movement of opposites in different things and, on the basis of such analysis,
to indicate the methods for resolving contradictions. It is therefore most
important for us to understand the law of contradiction in things in a concrete
way.