III. Third Stage. C' ; M'

Commodities become commodity-capital as a functional form of
existence ; stemming directly from the process of production itself ; 
of capital-value which has already produced surplus-value. If the production
of commodities were carried on capitalistically throughout society, all
commodities would be elements of commodity-capital from the outset, whether
they were crude iron, Brussels lace, sulphuric acid or cigars. The problem
of what kinds of commodities, is one of the self-created lovely ills of
scholastic political economy.

Capital in the form of commodities has to perform the function
of commodities. The articles of which capital is composed are produced
especially for the market and must be sold, transformed into money, hence
go through the process C ; M.

Suppose the commodity of the capitalist to consist of 10,000 lbs.
of cotton yarn. If &pound;372 represent the value of the means of production
consumed in the spinning process, and new value to the amount of &pound;128
has been created, the yarn has a value of &pound;500, which is expressed
in its price of the same amount. Suppose further that this price is realised
by the sale C ; M. What is it that makes of this simple act of all commodity
circulation at the same time a capital-function? No change that takes place
inside of it, neither in the use-character of the commodity ; for it passes
into the hands of the buyer as an object of use ; nor in its value, for
this value has not experienced any change of magnitude, but only of form.
It first existed in the form of yarn, while now it exists in the form of
money. Thus a substantial distinction is evident between the first stage
M ; C and the last stage C ; M. There the advanced money functions as money-capital, because it is transformed by means of the circulation into commodities
of a specific use-value. Here the commodities can serve as capital only
to the extent that they bring this character with them in ready shape from
the process of production before their circulation begins. During the spinning
process, the spinners create yarn value to the amount of &pound;128. Of
this sum, say &pound;50 represent to the capitalist merely an equivalent
for his outlay for labour-power, while &pound;78 ; when the degree of
exploitation of labour-power is 156 per cent ; form surplus-value. The
value of the 10,000 lbs. of yarn therefore embodies first the value of
the consumed productive capital P, the constant part of which amounts to

&pound;372 and the variable to &pound;50, their sum being &pound;422, equal
to 8,440 lbs. of yarn. Now the value of the productive capital P is equal
to C, the value of its constituent elements, which in the stage M ; C confronted
the capitalist as commodities in the hands of their sellers.

In the second place, however, the value of the yarn contains a
surplus-value of &pound;78, equal to 1,560 lbs. of yarn. C as an expression
of the value of the 10,000 lbs. of yarn is therefore equal to C plus DC,
or C plus an increment of C (equal to &pound;78), which we shall call c,
since it exists in the same commodity-form as now the original value C.
The value of the 10,000 lbs. of yarn, equal to &pound;500, is therefore
represented by C + c = C'. What turns C, the expression of the value of
10,000 lbs. of yarn, into C' is not the absolute magnitude of its value
(&pound;500), for that is determined, as in the case of any other C standing
for the expression of the value of some other sum of commodities, by the
quantity of labour embodied in it. It is its relative value-magnitude,
its value-magnitude as compared with that of capital P consumed in its
production. This value is contained in it plus the surplus-value supplied
by the productive capital. Its value is greater, exceeds that of the capital-value
by this surplus-value c. The 10,000 lbs. of yarn are the bearers of the
capital-value expanded, enriched by this surplus-value, and they are so
by virtue of being the product of the capitalist process of production.
C' expresses a value-relation, the relation of the value of the commodities
produced to that of the capital spent on their production, in other words,
expresses the fact that its value is composed of capital-value and surplus-value.
The 10,000 lbs. of yarn represent commodity capital, C', only because they
are a converted form of the productive capital P, hence in a connection
which exists originally only in the circuit of this individual capital,
or only for the capitalist who produced the yarn with the help of his capital.
It is, so to say, only an internal, not an external relation that turns the 10,000 lbs. of yarn in their capacity of vehicles of value into a commodity-capital. They exhibit their capitalist birthmark not in the absolute magnitude of their value but in its relative magnitude, in the magnitude of their value as compared with that possessed by the productive capital embodied in them before it was transformed into commodities. If,
then, these 10,000 lbs. of yarn are sold at their value of &pound;500,
this act of circulation, considered by itself, is identical with C ; M,
a mere transformation of an unchanging value from the form of a commodity
into that of money. But as a special stage in the circuit of an individual
capital, the same act is a realisation of the capital-value embodied in
the commodity to the amount of &pound;422 plus the surplus-value, likewise
embodied in it, of &pound;78. That is to say it represents C' ; M', the
transformation of the commodity-capital from its commodity-form into the
money form. [4]

The function of C' is now that of all commodities, viz.: to transform
itself into money, to be sold, to go through the circulation stage C ; M.
So long as the capital, now expanded, remains in the form of commodity-capital,
lies immovable in the market, the process of production is at rest. The
commodity-capital acts neither as a creator of products nor as a creator
of value. A given capital-value will serve, in widely different degrees,
as a creator of products and value, and the scale of reproduction will
be extended or reduced commensurate with the particular speed with which
that capital throws off its commodity-form and assumes that of money, or
with the rapidity of the sale. It was shown in Book I that the degree of
efficiency of any given capital is conditional on the potentialities of
the productive process, which to a certain extent are independent of the
magnitude of its own value. [English edition: Karl Marx, Capital,
Vol. I, pp. 602-08. ; Ed.] Here it appears that the process of
circulation sets in motion new forces independent of the capital's magnitude
of value and determining its degree of efficiency, its expansion and contraction.

The mass of commodities C', being the depository of the expanded
capital, must furthermore pass in its entirety through the metamorphosis
C' ; M'. The quantity sold is here a main determinant. The individual commodity
figures only as an integral part of the total mass. The &pound;500 worth
of value exists in the 10,000 lbs. of yarn. If the capitalist succeeds
in selling only 7,440 lbs. at their value of &pound;372, he has replaced
only the value of his constant capital, the value of the expanded means
of production. If he sells 8,440 lbs. he recovers only the value of the
total capital advanced. He must sell more in order to realise some surplus-value,
and he must sell the entire 10,000 lbs. in order to realise the surplus-value
of &pound;78 (1,560 lbs. of yarn). In &pound;500 in money he receives merely
an equivalent for the commodity sold. His transaction within the circulation
is simply C ; M. If he had paid his labourers &pound;64 in wages instead
of &pound;50 his surplus-value would only be &pound;64 instead of &pound;78,
and the degree of exploitation would have been only 100 per cent instead
of 156. But the value of the yarn would not change; only the relation between
its component parts would be different. The circulation act C ; M would
still represent the sale of 10,000 lbs. of yarn for &pound;500, their value.

C' is equal to C + c (or &pound;422 at &pound;78). C equals the
value of P, the productive capital, and this equals the value of M, the
money advanced in M ; C, the purchase of the elements of production, amounting
to &pound;422 in our example. If the mass of commodities is sold at its
value, then C equals &pound;422 and c equals &pound;78, the value of the
surplus-product of 1,560 lbs. of yarn. If we call c, expressed in money,
m, then C' ; M' = (C + c) - (M + m), and the circuit M ; C ... P ... C' ; M', 
in its expanded form, is therefore represented by 
M ; C<LMP ... P ... (C + c) - (M + m).

In the first stage the capitalist takes articles of consumption
out of the commodity-market proper and the labour-market. In the third
stage he throws commodities back, but only into one market, the commodity-market
proper. However the fact that he extracts from the market, by means of
his commodities, a greater value than he threw upon it originally is due
only to the circumstance that he throws more commodity-value back upon
it than he first drew out of it. He threw value M upon it and drew out
of it the equivalent C; he throws C + c back upon it, and draws out of
it the equivalent M + m.

M was in our example equal to the value of 8,440 lbs. of yarn.
But he throws 10,000 lbs. of yarn on the market, consequently he returns
a greater value than he took from it. On the other hand he threw this increased
value on the market only because through the exploitation of labour-power
in the process of production he had created surplus-value (as an aliquot
part of the product expressed in surplus-product). It is only by virtue
of being the product of this process that the mass of commodities becomes
commodity-capital, the bearer of the expanded capital-value. By performing
C' ; M' the advanced capital-value as well as the surplus-value are realised.
The realisation of both takes place simultaneously in a series of sales
or in a lump sale of the entire mass of commodities which is expressed
by C' ; M'. But the same circulation act C' ; M' is different for capital-value
and surplus-value, as it expresses for each of them a different stage of
their circulation, a different section of the series of metamorphoses through
which they must pass in the sphere of circulation. The surplus-value c
came into the world only during the process of production. It appeared
for the first time in the commodity-market, in the form of commodities.
This is its first form of circulation, hence the act c ; m is its first
circulation act, or its first metamorphosis, which remains to be supplemented
by the antithetical act of circulation, or the reverse metamorphosis, m ; c.
[5]

It is different with the circulation which the capital-value C
performs in the same circulation act C' ; M', and which constitutes for
the circulation act C ; M, in which C is equal to P, equal to the M originally
advanced. Capital-value has opened its first circulation act in the form
of M, money-capital, and returns through the act C ; M to the same form.
It has therefore passed through the two antithetical stages of circulation,
first M ; C, second C ; M, and finds itself once more in the form in which
it can begin its circular movement anew. What for surplus-value constitutes
the first transformation of the commodity-form into that of money, constitutes
for capital-value in return, or retransformation, into its original money-form.

By means of M ; C<LMP money capital is transformed into an equivalent mass of commodities, L and MP. These commodities no longer perform the function of commodities, of articles for sale. Their value is now in the hands of the capitalist who bought them; they represent
the value of his productive capital P. And in the function of P, productive
consumption, they are transformed into a kind of commodity differing materially
from the means of production, into yarn, in which their value is not only
preserved but increased, from &pound;422 to &pound;500. By means of this
real metamorphosis, the commodities taken from the market in the first
stage, M ; C, are replaced by commodities of different substance and value,
which now must perform the function of commodities, must be transformed
into money and sold. The process of production therefore appears to be
only an interruption of the process of circulation of capital-value, of
which up to that point only the first phase, M ; C, has been passed through.
It passes through the second and concluding phase, C ; M, after C has been
altered in substance and value. But so far as capital-value, considered
by itself, is concerned, it has merely suffered an alteration of its use-form
in the process of production. It existed in the form of &pound;422 worth
of L and MP, while now it exists in the form of &pound;422 worth of, or
8,440 lbs. of yarn. If we therefore consider merely the two circulation
phases of capital-value, apart from its surplus-value, we find that it
passes through 1) M ; C and 2) C ; M, in which the second C has a different
use-form but the same value as the first C. Hence it passes through M ; C ; M, a form of circulation which, because the commodity here changes place twice and in the opposite direction ; transformation from money into commodities and from commodities into money ; necessitates the return of the value advanced in the form of money to its money-form ; its reconversion into money.

The same circulation act C' ; M' that constitutes the second and
concluding metamorphosis, a return to the money-form, for the capital-value
advanced in money, represents for the surplus-value ; borne along by the
commodity-capital and simultaneously realised by its change into the money-form
; its first metamorphosis, its transformation from the commodity- to the
money-form, C ; M, its first circulation phase.

We have, then, two kinds of observations to make here. First,
the ultimate reconversion of capital-value into its original money-form
is a function of commodity-capital. Secondly, this function includes the
first transformation of surplus-value from its original commodity-form
to its money-form. The money-form, then, plays a double role here. On the
one hand it is the form to which a value originally advanced in money returns,
hence a return to the form of value which opened the process. On the other
hand it is the first converted form of a value which originally enters
the circulation in commodity-form. If the commodities composing the commodity-capital
are sold at their values, as we assume, then C plus c is transformed into
M plus m, its equivalent. The realised commodity-capital now exists in
the hands of the capitalist in this form: M plus m (&pound;422 plus &pound;78 = &pound;500). Capital-value and surplus-value are now present in the form of money, the
form of the universal equivalent.

At the conclusion of the process capital-value has therefore resumed
the form in which it entered it, and as money-capital can now open and
go through a new process. Just because the initial and final forms of this
process are those of money-capital, M, we call this form of the circulation
process the circuit of money-capital. It is not the form but merely the
magnitude of the advanced value that is changed at the close.

M plus m is nothing but a sum of money of a definite magnitude,
in this case &pound;500. But as a result of the circulation of capital,
as realised commodity-capital, this sum of money contains the capital-value
and the surplus-value. And these values are now no longer inseparably united
as they were in the yarn; they now lie side by side. Their sale has given
both of them an independent money-form; 211/250 of this money represent
the capital-value of &pound;422 and 39/250 constitute the surplus-value
of &pound;78. This separation, effected by the realisation of the commodity-capital,
has not only the formal content to which we shall refer presently. It becomes
important in the process of the reproduction of capital, depending on whether
m is entirely or partially or not at all lumped together with M, i.e.,
depending on whether or not it continues to function as a component part
of the advanced capital-value. Both m and M may pass through quite different
processes of circulation.

In M' capital has returned to its original form M, to its money-form,
a form however in which it is materialised as capital.

There is in the first place a difference of quantity. It was M,
&pound;422. It is now M', &pound;500, and this difference is expressed
by M ... M', the quantitatively different extremes of the circuit, whose
movement is indicated only by the three dots. M' > M, and M' - M = s, the
surplus-value. But as a result of this circular movement M ... M' it is
only M' which exists now; it is the product in which its process of formation
has become extinct. M' now exists by itself, independently of the movement
which brought it into existence. That movement is gone; M' is there in
its place.

But M', being M plus m, &pound;500, composed of &pound;422 advanced
capital plus an increment of the same amounting to &pound;78, represents
at the same time a qualitative relation, although this qualitative relation
itself exists only as a relation between the parts of one and the same
sum, hence as a quantitative relation. M, the advanced capital, which is
now once more present in its original form (&pound;422), exists as realised
capital. It has not only preserved itself but also realised itself as capital
by being distinguished as such from m (&pound;78), to which it stands in
the same relation as to an increase of its own, to a fruit of
its own, to an increment to which it has given birth itself. It has
been realised as capital because it has been realised as a value which
has created value. M' exists as a capital-relation. M no longer appears
as mere money, but expressly plays the part of money-capital, expressed
as a self-expanded value, hence possessing the property of self-expansion,
of hatching a higher value than it itself has. M became capital by virtue
of its relation to the other part of M', which it has brought about, which
has been effected by it as the cause, which is the consequence of it as
the ground. Thus M' appears as the sum of values differentiated within
itself, functionally (conceptually) distinguished within itself, expressing
the capital-relation.

But this is expressed only as a result, without the intervention
of the process of which it is the result.

Parts of value as such are not qualitatively different from one
another, except in so far as they appear as values of different articles,
of concrete things, hence in various use-forms and therefore as values
of different commodities ; a difference which does not originate with
them themselves as mere parts of value. In money all differences between
commodities are extinguished, because it is the equivalent form common
to all of them. A sum of money in the amount of &pound;500 consists solely
of uniform elements of &pound;1 each. Since the intermediate links of its
origin are obliterated in the simple existence of this sum of money and
every trace has been lost of the specific difference between the different
component parts of capital in the process of production, there exists now
only the distinction between the conceptual form of a principal equal to &pound;422, the capital advanced, and an excess value of &pound;78. Let
M' be equal to, say, &pound;110, of which &pound;100 may be equal to M,
the principal, and 10 equal to s, the surplus-value. There is an absolute
homogeneity, an absence of conceptual distinctions, between the two constituent
parts of the sum of &pound;110. Any &pound;10 of this sum always constitute
1/11 of the total sum of &pound;1/10, whether they are 1/10 of the advanced
principal of &pound;100 or the excess of &pound;10 above it. Principal
and excess sum, capital and surplus-sum, may therefore be expressed as
fractional parts of the total sum. In our illustration, 10/11 form the
principal, or the capital, and 1/11 the surplus sum. In its money-expression
realised capital appears therefore at the end of its process as an irrational
expression of the capital-relation.

True, this applies also to C' (C plus c). But there is this difference:
that C', of which C and c are only proportional value-parts of the same
homogeneous mass of commodities, indicates its origin P, whose immediate
product it is, while in M', a form derived directly from circulation, the
direct relation to P is obliterated.

The irrational distinction between the principal and the incremental
sum, which is contained in M', so far as that expresses the result of the
movement M ... M', disappears as soon as it once more functions actively
as money-capital and is therefore not fixed as a money-expression of expanded
industrial capital. The circuit of capital can never begin with M' (although
M' now performs the function of M). It can begin only with M, that is to
say it can never begin as an expression of the capital-relation, but only
as a form of advance of capital-value. As soon as the &pound;500 are once
more advanced as capital, in order again to produce s, they constitute
a point of departure, not one of return. Instead of a capital of &pound;422,
a capital of &pound;500 is now advanced. It is more money than before,
more capital-value, but the relation between its two constituent parts
has disappeared. In fact a sum of &pound;500 instead of the &pound;422
might originally have served as capital.

It is not an active function of money-capital to appear as M';
to appear as M' is rather a function of C'. Even in the simple circulation
of commodities, first in C1 ; M, secondly in M ; C2, money M does not figure actively until the second act, M ; C2. Its appearance in the form of M is only the result of the first act, by virtue of which it only then appears as a converted form of C1. True, the capital-relation contained in M', the relation of one of its
parts as the capital-value to the other as its value increment, acquires
functional importance in so far as, with the constantly repeated circuit
M ... M', M' splits into two circulations, one of them a circulation of
capital, the other of surplus-value. Consequently these two parts perform
not only quantitatively but also qualitatively different functions, M others
than m. But considered by itself, the form M ... M' does not include what
the capitalist consumes, but explicitly only the self-expansion and accumulation,
so far as the latter expresses itself above all as a periodical augmentation
of ever renewed advances of money-capital.

Although M', equal to M plus m, is the irrational form of capital,
it is at the same time only money-capital in its realised form, in the
form of money which has generated money. But this is different from the
function of money-capital in the first stage, 
M ; C<LMP.
In the first stage, M circulates as money. It assumes the functions of
money-capital because only in its money state can it perform a money-function,
can it transform itself into the elements of P, into L and MP, which stand
opposed to it as commodities. In this circulation act it functions only
as money. But as this act is the first stage of capital-value in process,
it is simultaneously a function of money-capital, by virtue of the specific
use-form of the commodities L and MP which are bought. M' on the other
hand, composed of M, the capital-value, and m, the surplus-value begotten
of M, stands for self-expanded capital-value ; the purpose and the outcome,
the function of the total circuit of capital. The fact that it expresses
this outcome in the form of money, as realised money-capital, does not
derive from its being the money-form of capital, money-capital,
but on the contrary from its being money-capital, capital in the
form of money, from capital having opened the process in this form, from
its having been advanced in the money-form. Its reconversion into the money-form
is, as we have seen, a function of commodity-capital C', not of money-capital.
As for the difference between M and M', it (m) is simply the money-form
of c, the increment of C. M' is composed of M plus m only because C' was
composed of C plus c. In C' therefore this difference and the relation
of the capital-value to the surplus-value generated by it is present and
expressed before both of them are transformed into M', into a sum of money
in which both parts of the value come face to face with each other independently
and may, therefore, be employed in separate and distinct functions.

M' is only the result of the realisation of C'. Both M' and C'
are merely different forms of self-expanded capital-value, one of them
the commodity-form, the other the money-form. Both of them have this in
common: that they are self-expanded capital-value. Both of them are materialised
capital, because capital-value as such exists here together with the surplus-value,
the fruit obtained through it and differing from it, although this relation
is expressed only in the irrational form of the relation between two parts
of a sum of money or of a commodity-value. But as expressions of capital
in relation and contradistinction to the surplus-value produced by it,
hence as expressions of self-expanded value, M' and C' are the same and
express the same thing, only in different forms. They do not differ as
money-capital and commodity-capital but as money and commodities. In so
far as they represent self-expanded value, capital acting as capital, they
only express the result of the functioning of productive capital, the only
function in which capital-value generates value. What they have in common
is that both of them, money-capital as well as commodity-capital, are modes
of existence of capital. The one is capital in money-form, the other in
commodity-form. The specific functions that distinguish them cannot therefore
be anything else but differences between the functions of money and of
commodities. Commodity-capital, the direct product of the capitalist process
of production, is reminiscent of its origin and is therefore more rational
and less incomprehensible in form than money-capital, in which every trace
of this process has vanished, as in general all special use-forms of commodities
disappear in money. It is therefore only when M' itself functions as commodity-capital,
when it is the direct product of a productive process instead of being
the converted form of this product, that it loses its bizarre form, that
is to say, in the production of the money material itself. In the production
of gold for instance the formula would be M ; C<LMP ... P ... M' (M plus m), where M' would figure as a commodity product, because P furnishes more gold than was advanced for the elements of production of the gold in the first M, the money-capital. In this case the irrational
nature of the expression M ... M' (M plus m) disappears. Here a part of
a sum of money appears as the mother of another part of the same sum of money.