V. The Mediation of Exchange by the Circulation of Money

So far as we have analysed circulation up to the present, it proceeded
between the various classes of producers as indicated in the following
scheme:

1) Between department I and department II:

I.
4,000c
+ 1,000v + 1,000s

II.
 
2,000c 
500v+500s

This disposes of the circulation of IIc, equal to 2,000, which is
exchanged for I (1,000v + 1,000s).

Leaving aside for the present the 4,000 Ic there still remains the
circulation of v + s within class II. Now II(v + s) is divided between the
sub-classes IIa and IIb in the following manner:

2) II. 500v + 500s = a (400v + 400s) + b (100v + 100s).

The 400v (a) circulates within its own sub-class; the labourers paid
with it buy from their employers, the capitalists IIa, necessary means of
subsistence produced by themselves.

Since the capitalists of both sub-classes spend three-fifths of their
surplus-value in products of IIa (necessities) and two-fifths in products of
IIb (luxuries), the three-fifths of the surplus-value of a, or 240, are
consumed within the sub-class IIa itself; likewise, two-fifths of the
surplus-value of b (produced and existing in the form of articles of
luxury), within the sub-class IIb.

There remains to be exchanged between IIa and IIb: On the side of
IIa: 160s;

On the side of IIb: 100v + 60s. These cancel each other. With their 100, received in the form of money wages, the labourers of IIb buy
necessities of life in that amount from IIa. The IIb capitalists likewise
buy necessities from IIa to the amount of three-fifths of their surplus-value,
or 60. The IIa capitalists thus obtain the money required for
investing, as above assumed, two-fifths of their surplus-value, or 160s,
in luxuries produced by IIb (100, held by the IIb capitalists as a product
replacing the wages paid by them, and 60s). The scheme for this is
therefore:

3)
IIa.
(400v)+(240s)
+ 160s

b.
 
 100v + 60s
(+ 40s)

the bracketed items circulating and being consumed only within their
own sub-class.

The direct reflux of the money-capital advanced in variable capital,
which takes place only in the case of the capitalist department IIa which
produces necessities of life, is but an expression, modified by special
conditions, of the previously mentioned general law that money
advanced to the circulation by producers of commodities returns to them
in the normal course of commodity circulation. From this it incidentally
follows that if any money-capitalist at all stands behind the producer of
commodities and advances to the industrial capitalist money-capital (in
the strictest meaning of the word, i.e., capital-value in the form of
money), the real point of reflux for this money is the pocket of this
money-capitalist. Thus the mass of the circulating money belongs to that
department of money-capital which is organised and concentrated in the
form of banks, etc., although the money circulates more or less through
all hands. The way in which this department advances its capital
necessitates the continual final reflux to it in the form of money,
although this is once again brought about by the reconversion of the
industrial capital into money-capital.

The circulation of commodities always requires two things:
Commodities which are thrown into circulation and money which is
likewise thrown into it. "The process of circulation ... does not, like
direct barter of products, become extinguished upon the use-values
changing places and hands. The money does not vanish on dropping out
of the circuit of the metamorphosis of a given commodity. It is
constantly being precipitated into new places in the arena of circulation
vacated by other commodities," etc. (Vol. I, Ch. III.).

For instance in the circulation between IIc and I(v + s) we assumed that II had advanced &pound;500 in money for it. In the innumerable processes of circulation, into which the circulation between large social groups of
producers resolves itself, representatives of the various groups will at
various times be the first to appear as buyers, and hence throw money
into circulation. Quite apart from particular circumstances, this is
necessitated by the difference, if nothing else, in the periods of
production, and thus of the turnovers, of the various commodity-capitals.
So with these &pound;500 II buys from I means of production of the same
value and I buys from II articles of consumption valued at &pound;500. Hence
the money flows back to II, but this department does not in any way
grow richer by this reflux. It had first thrown &pound;500 in money into
circulation and drew commodities of the same value out of it; then it
sells &pound;500 worth of commodities and draws the same amount of money
out of circulation; thus the &pound;500 flow back to it. As a matter of fact, II
has thrown into circulation &pound;500 in money and &pound;500 in commodities,
which is equal to &pound;1,000. It draws out of the circulation &pound;500 in
commodities and &pound;500 in money. The circulation requires for the
handling of &pound;500 in I commodities and &pound;500 in II commodities only
&pound;500 in money; hence whoever advanced the money in the purchase of
commodities from other producers recovers it when selling his own. Consequently
if I had at first bought commodities from II for &pound;500, and later
sold to II commodities of the value of &pound;500, these &pound;500 would have
returned to I instead of to II.

In class I the money invested in wages, i.e., the variable capital
advanced in the form of money, does not return directly in this form but
indirectly, by a detour. But in II the &pound;500 of wages return directly from
the labourers to the capitalists, and this return is always direct in the
case where purchase and sale take place repeatedly between the same
persons in such a way that they are acting alternately as buyers and
sellers of commodities. The capitalist of II pays for the labour-power in
money; he thereby incorporates labour-power in his capital and assumes
the role of an industrial capitalist in relation to his labourers as wage-earners,
but does so only by means of this act of circulation, which is for
him merely a conversion of money-capital into productive capital.
Thereupon the labourer, who in the first instance was a seller, a dealer
in his own labour-power, appears in the second instance as a buyer, a
possessor of money, in relation to the capitalist, who now acts as a
seller of commodities. In this way the capitalist recovers the money
invested by him in wages. As the sale of these commodities does not
imply cheating, etc., but is an exchange of equivalents in commodities
and money, it is not a process by which the capitalist enriches himself.
He does not pay the labourer twice, first in money and then in commodities.
His money returns to him as soon as the labourer exchanges it
for his commodities.

However, the money-capital converted into variable capital, i.e., the
money advanced for wages, plays a prominent role in the circulation of
money itself, since the labourers must live from hand to mouth and
cannot give the industrial capitalists credit for any length of time. For
this reason variable capital must be advanced in the form of money
simultaneously at innumerable territorially different points in society at
certain short intervals, such as a week, etc.; in periods of time that
repeat themselves rather quickly (and the shorter these periods, the
smaller relatively is the total amount of money thrown at one time into
circulation through this channel) ; whatever the various periods of
turnover of the capitals in the different branches of industry. In every
country with a capitalist production the money-capital so advanced
constitutes a relatively decisive share of the total circulation, the more so
as the same money, before its reflux to its point of departure, passes
through the most diverse channels and functions as a medium of
circulation for countless other businesses.

Now let us consider the circulation between I(v + s) and II from a
different angle.

Capitalists I advance &pound;1,000 in the payment of wages. With this
money the labourers buy &pound;1,000 worth of means of subsistence from
capitalists II. These in turn buy for the same money means of production
from capitalists I. Capitalists I thus get back their variable capital in the
form of money, while capitalists II have reconverted one half of their
constant capital from the form of commodity-capital into that of
productive capital. Capitalists II advance another &pound;500 in money to get
means of production from I. The capitalists I spend this money on
articles of consumption from II. These &pound;500 thus return to capitalists II.
They advance this amount again in order to reconvert the last quarter of
their constant capital, converted into commodities, into its productive
bodily form. This money flows back to I and once more withdraws
articles of consumption of the same amount from II. Thus the &pound;500
return to II. The capitalists II are now as before in possession of &pound;500 in
money and &pound;2,000 in constant capital, the latter having been newly
converted from the form of commodity-capital into that of productive
capital. By means of &pound;1,500 a quantity of commodities worth &pound;5,000
has been circulated. Namely: 1) I pays &pound;1,000 to his labourers for their
labour-power of the same value; 2) With these same &pound;1,000 the
labourers buy means of subsistence from II; 3) With the same money II
buys means of production from I, thereby restoring to I variable capital
to the amount of &pound;1,000 in the form of money; 4) II buys &pound;500 worth
of means of production from I; 5) With the same &pound;500 I buys articles of
consumption from II; 6) With the same &pound;500 II buys means of
production from I; 7) With the same &pound;500 I buys means of subsistence
from II. Thus &pound;500 have returned to II, which had thrown them into
circulation besides its &pound;2,000 in commodities and for which it did not
withdraw from circulation any equivalent in commodities.

The exchange therefore takes the following course:

1) I pays &pound;1,000 in money for labour-power, hence for commodities
equal to &pound;1,000.

2) The labourers buy with their wages amounting in money to
&pound;1,000 articles of consumption from II; hence commodities equal to
&pound;1,000.

3) With the &pound;1,000 received from the labourers II buys means of
production of the same value from I; hence commodities equal to
&pound;1,000.

In this way the &pound;1,000 have returned to I as the money-form of its
variable capital.

4) II buys &pound;500 worth of means of production from I, hence
commodities equal to &pound;500.

5) With the same &pound;500 I buys articles of consumption from II; hence
commodities equal to &pound;500.

6) With the same &pound;500 II buys means of production from I; hence
commodities equal to &pound;500.

7) With the same &pound;500 I buys articles of consumption from II; hence
commodities equal to &pound;500.

Total amount of commodity-values exchanged: &pound;5,000.

The &pound;500 advanced by II for the purchase have returned to it.

The result is as follows:

1) I possesses variable capital in the form of money to the amount of
&pound;1,000, which it originally advanced to the circulation. It furthermore
expended &pound;1,000 for its individual consumption, in the shape of its own
products; i.e., it has spent the money which it had received for the sale
of means of production to the amount of &pound;1,000.

On the other hand the bodily form into which the variable capital
existing in the form of money must be transformed, i.e., labour-power,
has been maintained, reproduced and again made available by
consumption as the sole article of trade of its owners, which they must
sell in order to live. The relation of wage-labourers and capitalists has
likewise been reproduced.

2) The constant capital of II is replaced in kind, and the &pound;500
advanced by the same II to the circulation have returned to it. As for the
labourers I, the circulation is the simple one of C; M; C:C1 (labour-power) ; M2 (&pound;1,000, money-form of variable capital I) ; C3 (necessities of life to the amount of &pound;1,000); these &pound;1,000 convert into money to the same amount of value the constant capital II existing in the form of commodities, of means of subsistence.

As for the capitalists II, the process is C; M, the transformation of a
portion of their commodity-product into the money-form, from which it is
reconverted into the constituents of productive capital, namely into a
portion of the means of production required by them.
In the money advance (&pound;500) made by capitalists II for the purchase
of the other parts of the means of production, the money-form of that
portion of II which exists as yet in the form of commodities (articles of
consumption) is anticipated; in the act M ; C, in which II buys with M,
and C is sold by I, the money (II) is converted into a portion of the
productive capital, while C (I) passes through the act C ; M, changes
into money, which however does not represent any component part of
capital-value for I, but surplus-value converted into money and expended
solely for articles of consumption.

In the circuit M ; C ... P ... C' ; M', the first act, M ; C, is that of one capitalist, the last, C' ; M' (or part of it), is that of another; whether the
C, by which M is converted into productive capital, represents a
component of constant capital, of variable capital, or surplus-value for
the seller of C (who exchanges this C for money), is wholly immaterial
for the commodity circulation itself.

Class I, so far as concerns the component v + s of its commodity-product,
draws more money out of the circulation than it has thrown in.
In the first place, the &pound;1,000 of variable capital return to it; in the
second place, it sells means of production worth &pound;500 (see above,
exchange No. 4); one half of its surplus-value is thus turned into money;
then (exchange No. 6) it sells once more &pound;500 worth of means of
production, the second half of its surplus-value, and thus the entire
surplus-value is withdrawn from circulation in the shape of money.
Hence in succession: 1) variable capital reconverted into money, equal
to &pound;1,000; 2) one half of the surplus-value turned into money, equal to
&pound;500; 3) the other half of the surplus-value, equal to &pound;500; altogether
1,000v + 1,000s turned into money, equal to &pound;2,000. Although I threw only &pound;1,000 into circulation (aside from those exchanges which promote the reproduction of I and which we shall have to analyse later), it has
withdrawn double that amount from it. Of course s passes into other
hands, (II), as soon as it has been converted into money, by being spent
for articles of consumption. The capitalists of I withdrew only as much in
money as they threw into it in value in the form of commodities; the fact
that this value is surplus-value, i.e., that it does not cost the capitalists
anything, does not alter the value of these commodities in any way; so
far as the exchange of values in commodity circulation is concerned, that
fact is of no consequence at all. The existence of surplus-value in money
is of course transient, the same as all other forms which the advanced
capital assumes in its metamorphoses. It lasts no longer than the
interval between the conversion of commodities I into money and the
subsequent conversion of the money I into commodities II.

If the turnovers had been assumed to be shorter ; or, from the point
of view of the simple circulation of commodities, the circulation of
money more rapid ; even less money would be ample to circulate the
exchanged commodity-values; the amount is always determined ; if the
number of successive exchanges is given ; by the sum of the prices, or
the sum of values, of the circulating commodities. It is immaterial in
what proportion this sum of values consists of surplus-value on the one
hand, and of capital-value on the other.

If the wages of I, in our illustration, were paid four times per year, we
should have 4 times 250, or 1,000. Hence &pound;250 in money would
suffice for the circulation Iv ; &frac12; IIc, and for that between the variable capital Iv and the labour-power I. Likewise, if the circulation between I and II were to take place in four turnovers, it would require only &pound;250, or in the aggregate a sum of money, or a money-capital, of &pound;500 for the circulation of commodities amounting to &pound;5,000. In that case the
surplus-value would be converted into money four times successively,
one-quarter each time, instead of twice successively, one half each time.

If I instead of II should act as buyer in exchange No. 4 and expend
&pound;500 for articles of consumption of the same value, II would buy means
of production with the same &pound;500 in exchange No. 5; 6) I buys articles
of consumption with the same &pound;500; 7) II buys means of production
with the same &pound;500 so that the &pound;500 finally return to I, the same as
before to II. The surplus-value is here converted into money by means of
the money spent by the capitalist producers themselves for their
individual consumption. This money represents the anticipated revenue,
the anticipated receipts from the surplus-value contained in the
commodities still to be sold. The surplus-value is not converted into
money by the reflux of the &pound;500; for aside from &pound;1,000 in the form of
commodities Iv, I threw &pound;500 in money into circulation at the close of exchange No. 4, and this was additional money, so far as we know, and
not the proceeds from the sale of commodities. If this money flows back
to I, I merely gets back its additional money, and does not thereby
convert its surplus-value into money. The conversion of the surplus-value
I into money takes place only by the sale of the commodities Is, in which
it is incorporated, and lasts each time only until the money obtained by
the sale of the commodities is expended anew in the purchase of articles
of consumption.

With additional money (&pound;500) I buys articles of consumption from II;
this money was spent by I, which holds its equivalent in II commodities;
the money returns for the first time by the purchase from I by II of
commodities to the amount of &pound;500; in other words, it returns as the
equivalent of the commodities sold by I, but these commodities do not
cost I anything, they constitute surplus-value for I, and thus the money
thrown into circulation by this very department turns its own surplus-value
into money. On buying for the second time (No. 6) I has likewise
obtained its equivalent in II commodities. Take it, now, that II does not
buy (No. 7) means of production from I. In that case I would have
actually paid &pound;1,000 for articles of consumption, thereby consuming its
entire surplus-value as revenue; namely, 500 in its own I commodities
(means of production) and 500 in money: on the other hand, it would
still have &pound;500 in its own commodities (means of production) in stock,
and would have got rid of &pound;500 in money.

On the contrary II would have reconverted three-fourths of its
constant capital from the form of commodity-capital into that of
productive capital; but one-fourth (&pound;500) would be held by it in the form
of money-capital, actually in the form of idle money, or of money which
has suspended its function and is held in abeyance. Should this state of
affairs last for any length of time, II would have to cut down its scale of
reproduction by one-fourth.

However the 500 in means of production, which I has on its hands,
are not surplus-value existing in the form of commodities; they occupy
the place of the &pound;500 advanced in money, which I possessed aside from
its &pound;1,000 of surplus-value in commodity-form. In the form of money,
they are always convertible; as commodities they are momentarily
unsaleable. So much is evident: that simple reproduction ; in which
every element of productive capital must be replaced in both II and I ; 
remains possible in this case only if the 500 golden birds, which I first
sent flying, return to it.

If a capitalist (we have only industrial capitalists still to deal with
here, who are the representatives of all others) spends money for articles
of consumption, he is through with it, it goes the way of all flesh. It can
flow back to him only if he fishes it out of circulation in exchange for
commodities, i.e., for his commodity-capital. As the value of his entire
annual commodity-product (his commodity-capital), so that of every one
of its elements, i.e., the value of every individual commodity, is divisible,
as far as he is concerned, into constant capital-value, variable capital-value,
and surplus-value. The conversion into money of every individual
commodity (as elements constituting the commodity-product) is
consequently at the same time such a conversion of a certain portion of
the surplus-value contained in the entire commodity-product. In this
case, then, it is literally true that the capitalist himself threw the money
into circulation ; when he spent it on articles of consumption ; by which
his surplus-value is converted into money, or realised. Of course it is not
a question of the identical coins but of a certain amount of hard cash
equal to the one (or to a portion of the one) which he had previously
thrown into circulation to satisfy his personal wants.

In practice this occurs in two ways. If the business has just been
opened, in the current year, it will take quite a while, at least a few
months, before the capitalist is able to use any portion of the receipts of
his business for his personal consumption. But for all that he does not
suspend his consumption for a single moment. He advances to himself
(immaterial whether out of his own pocket or by means of credit from
the pocket of somebody else) money in anticipation of surplus-value still
to be snatched by him; but in doing so he also advances a circulating
medium for the realisation of surplus-value to be realised later. If, on the
contrary, the business has been running regularly for a longer period
payments and receipts are distributed over different terms throughout
the year. But one thing continues uninterruptedly, namely, the
consumption of the capitalist, which anticipates, and whose volume is
computed on a definite proportion of, the customary or estimated
revenue. With every portion of commodities sold, a portion of the
surplus-value to be produced annually is also realised. But if during the
entire year only as much of the produced commodities is sold as is
required to replace the constant and variable capital-values contained in
them, or if prices were to fall to such an extent that only the advanced
capital-value contained in the entire annual commodity-product should
be realised on its sale, then the anticipatory character of the expenditure
of money in expectation of future surplus-value would be clearly
revealed. If our capitalist fails, his creditors and the court investigate
whether his anticipated private expenditures were in proper proportion to
the volume of his business and to the receipt of surplus-value usually or
normally corresponding to it.

So far as the entire capitalist class is concerned, the proposition that
it must itself throw into circulation the money required for the realisation
of its surplus-value (correspondingly also for the circulation of its capital,
constant and variable) not only fails to appear paradoxical, but stands
forth as a necessary condition of the entire mechanism. For there are
here only two classes: the working-class disposing only of its labour-power,
and the capitalist class, which has a monopoly of the social
means of production and money. It would rather be a paradox if the
working-class were to advance in the first instance from its own
resources the money required for the realisation of the surplus-value
contained in the commodities. But the individual capitalist makes this
advance only by acting as a buyer, expending money in the purchase of
articles of consumption or advancing money in the purchase of elements
of his productive capital, whether of labour-power or means of
production. He never parts with his money unless he gets an equivalent
for it. He advances money to the circulation only in the same way as he
advances commodities to it. He acts in both instances as the initial point
of their circulation.

The actual process is obscured by two circumstances:

1) The appearance in the process of circulation of industrial capital of
merchant's capital (the first form of which is always money, since the merchant as such does not create any "product" or "commodity") and of money-capital as an object of manipulation by a special kind of capitalists.

2) The division of surplus-value ; which must always be first in the
hands of the industrial capitalist ; into various categories, as vehicles of
which there appear, aside from the industrial capitalist, the landlord (for
ground-rent), the usurer (for interest), etc., furthermore the government
and its employees, rentiers, etc. These gentry appear as buyers vis-&agrave;-vis
the industrial capitalist and to that extent as converters of his
commodities into money; they too throw "money" pro parte into the circulation and he gets it from them. But it is always forgotten from what
source they derived it originally, and continue deriving it ever anew.