XII. The Reproduction of the Money Material

One factor has so far been entirely disregarded, namely the annual
reproduction of gold and silver. As mere material for articles of luxury,
gilding, etc., there is as little occasion for special mention of them as
there is of mentioning any other products. But they play an important
role as money material and hence as potential money. For the sake of
simplicity we here regard only gold as material for money.

According to older data the entire annual production of gold
amounted to 800,000-900,000 lbs., equal roundly to 1,100 or 1,250
million marks. But according to Soetbeers it amounted to only
170,675 kilograms, valued at roundly 476 million marks, based on the
average for 1871 to 1875. Of this amount Australia supplied roundly
167, the United States 166, and Russia 93 million marks. The
remainder is distributed over various countries in amounts of less than
10 million marks each. During the same period, the annual production
of silver amounted to somewhat less than 2 million kilograms, valued at
354&frac12; million marks. Of this amount, Mexico supplied roundly 108, the
United States 102, South America 67, Germany 26 million, etc.

Among the countries with predominantly capitalist production only
the United States is a producer of gold and silver. The capitalist
countries of Europe obtain almost all their gold, and by far the greater
part of their silver, from Australia, the United States, Mexico, South
America, and Russia.

But we take it that the gold mines are in a country with capitalist
production whose annual reproduction we are here analysing, and for
the following reasons:

Capitalist production does not exist at all without foreign commerce.
But when one assumes normal annual reproduction on a given scale one
also assumes that foreign commerce only replaces home products by
articles of other use or bodily form, without affecting value-relations,
hence without affecting either the value-relations in which the two
categories "means of production" and "articles of consumption" mutually exchange, or the relations between constant capital, variable capital, and surplus-value, into which the value of the product of each of these
categories may be divided. The involvement of foreign commerce in
analysing the annually reproduced value of products can therefore only
confuse without contributing any new element of the problem, or of its
solution. For this reason it must be entirely discarded. And consequently
gold too is to be treated here as a direct element of annual reproduction
and not as a commodity element imported from abroad by means of
exchange.

The production of gold, like that of metals generally, belongs in class
I, the category which embraces the production of means of production.
Supposing the annual production of gold is equal to 30 (for
convenience's sake; actually the figure is much too high compared to the
other figures of our scheme). Let this value be divisible into 20c + 5v + 5s; 20c is to be exchanged for other elements of Ic and this is to be studied later; but the 5v + 5s (I) are to be exchanged for elements of IIc, i.e., articles of consumption.

As for the 5v, every gold-producing establishment begins by buying
labour-power. This is done not with gold produced by this particular
enterprise, but with a portion of the money-supply in the land. The
labourers buy with this 5v articles of consumption from II, and that buys
with this money means of production from I. Let II buy gold from I to the
amount of 2 as commodity material, etc. (component part of its constant
capital), then 2v flow back to gold producers I in money which has
already belonged to the circulation. If II does not buy any more material
from I, then I buys from II by throwing its gold into circulation as money,
since gold can buy any commodity. The difference is only that I does not
act here as a seller, but only as a buyer. Gold miners I can always get rid
of their commodity; it is always in a directly exchangeable form.

Let us assume that some producer of yarn has paid 5v to his
labourers, who create for him in return ; aside from the surplus-value ; a
yarn product equal to 5. For 5 the labourers buy from IIc, and the latter
buys yarn from I for 5 in money, and thus 5 flows back in money to the
spinner of yarn. Now in the case assumed I g (as we shall designate the
producers of gold) advances to its labourers 5v in money which
previously belonged to the circulation. The labourers spend it for articles
of consumption, but only 2 of the 5 return from II to I g. However I g can
begin the process of reproduction anew, just as well as the producer of
yarn. For his labourers have supplied him with 5 in gold, 2 of which he
sold and 3 of which he still has, so that he has but to coin 
[45] them, or
turn them into bank-notes to have his entire variable capital again
directly in his hands in money-form, without the further intervention of
II.

Even this first process of annual reproduction has wrought a change
in the quantity of money actually or virtually belonging to the circulation.
We assumed that IIc bought 2v (I g) as material, and that I g has again laid out 3 ; as the money-form of its variable capital ; within II. Hence 3 of the mass of money supplied by the new gold production remained
within II and did not return to I. According to our assumption II has
satisfied its requirements in gold material. The 3 remain in its hands as
a gold hoard. Since they cannot constitute any element of its constant
capital, and since II had previously enough money-capital for the purchase
of labour-power; since furthermore these additional 3 g, with the
exception of the depreciation element, have no function to perform
within IIc, for a portion of which they were exchanged (they could only
serve to cover the depreciation element pro tanto, if IIc (1) should be smaller than IIc (2), which would be accidental); on the other hand, however, namely with the exception of the depreciation element, the
entire commodity-product IIc, must be exchanged for means of
production I(v + s) ; this money must be transferred in its entirety from IIc to IIs, no matter whether it exists in necessities of life or articles of luxury, and vice versa corresponding commodity-value must be
transferred from IIs to IIc. Result: A portion of the surplus-value is stored up as a money-hoard.

In the second year of reproduction, provided the same proportion of
annually produced gold continues to be used as material, 2 will again
flow back to I g, and 3 will be replaced in kind, i.e., will be released
again in II as a hoard, etc.

With reference to the variable capital in general: The capitalist I g,
like every other capitalist, must continually advance this capital in
money for the purchase of labour-power. But so far as this v is
concerned, it is not he but his labourers who have to buy from II. It can
therefore never happen that he should act as a buyer, throwing gold into
II without the initiative of II. But to the extent that II buys material from
him, and must convert constant capital II c into gold material, a portion of
(I g)v flows back to him from II in the same way that it does to other
capitalists of I. And so far as this is not the case, he replaces his v in
gold directly from his product. But to the extent that the v advanced in
money does not flow back to him from II, a portion of the already
available means of circulation (received from I and not returned to I) is
converted in II into a hoard and for that reason a portion of its surplus-value
is not expended for articles of consumption. Since new gold-mines
are continually opened or old ones re-opened, a certain portion of the
money to be laid out by I g in v is always part of the money existing prior
to the new gold production; it is thrown by I g through its labourers into
II, and unless it returns from II to I g it forms there an element of hoard
formation.

But as for (I g)s, I g can always act here as buyer. He throws his s in
the shape of gold into circulation and withdraws from it in return articles
of consumption IIc. In II the gold is used in part as material, and thus
functions as a real element of the constant constituent portion c of the
productive capital. When this is not the case it becomes once more an
element of hoard formation as a part of IIs persisting in the form of
money. We see, then, aside from Ic which we reserve for a later analysis, 
[46] 
that even simple reproduction, excluding accumulation
proper, namely reproduction on an extended scale, necessarily includes
the storing up, or hoarding, of money. And as this is annually repeated,
it explains the assumption from which we started in the analysis of
capitalist production, namely, that at the beginning of the reproduction a
supply of money corresponding to the exchange of commodities is in the
hands of capitalist classes I and II. Such an accumulation takes place
even after deducting the amount of gold being lost through the
depreciation of money in circulation.

It goes without saying that the more advanced capitalist production,
the more money is accumulated in all hands, and therefore the smaller
the quantity annually added to this hoard by the production of new gold,
although the absolute quantity thus added may be considerable. We
revert once more in general terms to the objection raised against Tooke;
how is it possible that every capitalist draws a surplus-value in money
out of the annual product, i.e., draws more money out of the circulation
than he throws into it, since in the long run the capitalist class itself
must be regarded as the source of all the money thrown into circulation?

We reply by summarising the ideas developed previously (in Chapter XVII):

1) The only assumption essential here, namely, that in general there
is money enough for the exchange of the various elements of the mass of
the annual reproduction, is not affected in any way by the fact that a
portion of the commodity-value consists of surplus-value. Supposing that
the entire production belonged to the labourers themselves and that their
surplus-labour were therefore only surplus-labour for themselves, not for
the capitalists, then the quantity of circulating commodity-values would
be the same and, other things being equal, would require the same
amount of money for their circulation. The question in either case is
therefore only: Where does the money come from to make possible the
exchange of this total of commodity-values? It is not at all: where does
the money come from to turn the surplus-value into money?
It is true, to revert to it once more, that every individual commodity
consists of c + v + s, and the circulation of the entire quantity of
commodities therefore requires on the one hand a definite sum of money
for the circulation of the capital c + v and on the other hand another
sum for the circulation of the revenue of the capitalists, the surplus-value
s. For the individual capitalist, as well as for the entire capitalist class;
the money in which they advance capital is different from the money in
which they spend their revenue. Where does the latter money come
from? Simply from the mass of money in the hands of the capitalist
class, hence by and large from the total mass of money in society, a portion
of which circulates the revenue of the capitalists. We have seen
above that every capitalist establishing a new business recoups the
money which he spent for his maintenance in articles of consumption as
money serving to convert his surplus-value into money, once his
business is fairly under way. But generally speaking the whole difficulty
has two sources:

In the first place, if we analyse only the circulation and the turnover
of capital, thus regarding the capitalist merely as a personification of
capital, not as a capitalist consumer and man about town, we see
indeed that he is continually throwing surplus-value into circulation as a
component part of his commodity-capital, but we never see money as a
form of revenue in his hands. We never see him throwing money into
circulation for the consumption of his surplus-value.

In the second place, if the capitalist class throws a certain amount of
money into circulation in the shape of revenue, it looks as if it were
paying an equivalent for this portion of the total annual product, and this
portion thereby ceases to represent surplus-value. But the surplus-product
in which the surplus-value is represented does not cost the
capitalist class anything. As a class, the capitalists possess and enjoy it
gratuitously, and the circulation of money cannot alter this fact. The
alteration brought about by this circulation consists merely in the fact
that every capitalist, instead of consuming his surplus-product in kind, a
thing which is generally impossible, draws commodities of all sorts up to
the amount of the surplus-value he has appropriated out of the general
stock of the annual surplus-product of society and appropriates them. But 
the mechanism of the circulation has shown that while the capitalist
class throws money into circulation for the purpose of spending its
revenue, it also withdraws this money from the circulation, and can
continue the same process over and over again; so that, considered as a
class, capitalists remain as before in possession of the amount of money
necessary for the conversion of surplus-value into money. Hence, if the
capitalist not only withdraws his surplus-value from the commodity-market
in the form of commodities for his consumption-fund, but at the
same time gets back the money with which he has paid for these
commodities, he has evidently withdrawn the commodities from
circulation without paying an equivalent for them. They do not cost him
anything, although he pays money for them. If I buy commodities for one
pound sterling and the seller of the commodities gives me the pound
back for surplus-product which I got for nothing, it is obvious that I
received the commodities gratis. The constant repetition of this operation
does not alter the fact that I constantly withdraw commodities and
constantly remain in possession of the pound, although I part with it
temporarily to purchase commodities. The capitalist constantly gets this
money back as a money equivalent of surplus-value that has not cost
him anything.

We have seen that with Adam Smith the entire value of the social
product resolves itself into revenue, into v + s, so that the constant
capital-value is set down as zero. It follows necessarily that the money
required for the circulation of the yearly revenue must also suffice for the
circulation of the entire annual product, that therefore in our illustration
the money required for the circulation of the articles of consumption
worth 3,000 also suffices for the circulation of the entire annual product
worth 9,000. This is indeed the opinion of Adam Smith, and it is
repeated by Th. Tooke. This erroneous conception of the ratio of the
quantity of money required for the realisation of revenue to the quantity
of money required to circulate the entire social product is the necessary
result of the uncomprehended, thoughtlessly conceived manner in which
the various elements of material and value of the total annual product
are reproduced and annually replaced. It has therefore already been
refuted.

Let us listen to Smith and Tooke themselves.

Smith says in Book II, Ch. 2:

"The circulation of every country may
be considered as divided into two different branches: the circulation of
the dealers with one another, and the circulation between the dealers
and the consumers. Though the same pieces of money, whether paper
or metal, may be employed sometimes in the one circulation and
sometimes in the other; yet as both are constantly going on at the same
time, each requires a certain stock of money of one kind or another, to
carry it on. The value of the goods circulated between the different
dealers, never can exceed the value of those circulated between the
dealers and the consumers; whatever is bought by the dealers, being
ultimately destined to be sold to the consumers. The circulation between
the dealers, as it is carried on by wholesale, requires generally a pretty
large sum for every particular transaction. That between the dealers and
the consumers, on the contrary, as it is generally carried on by retail,
frequently requires but very small ones, a shilling, or even a halfpenny,
being often sufficient. But small sums circulate much faster than large
ones... Though the annual purchases of all the consumers, therefore,
are at least" [this "at least" is rich] "equal in value to those of all the dealers, they can generally be transacted with a much smaller quantity
of money;" etc.

Th. Tooke remarks to this passage from Adam Smith (in An Inquiry
into the Currency Principle, London, 1844, pp. 34 to 36 passim):

"There can be no doubt that the distinction here made is substantially correct ... the interchange between dealers and consumers including the
payment of wages, which constitute the principal means of the
consumers... All the transactions between dealers and dealers, by
which are to be understood all sales from the producer or importer,
through all the stages of intermediate processes of manufacture or
otherwise to the retail dealer or the exporting merchant, are resolvable
into movements or transfers of capital. Now transfers of capital do not
necessarily suppose, nor do actually as a matter of fact entail, in the
great majority of transactions, a passing of money, that is, bank-notes or
coin ; I mean bodily, and not by fiction ; at the time of transfer... The total amount of the transactions between dealers and dealers must, in the last
resort, be determined and limited by the amount of those between
dealers and consumers."

If this last sentence stood by itself, one might think Tooke simply
stated the fact that there was a ratio between the exchanges among
dealers and those among dealers and consumers, in other words,
between the value of the total annual revenue and the value of the
capital with which it is produced. But this is not the case. He explicitly
endorses the view of Adam Smith. A special criticism of his theory of
circulation is therefore superfluous.

2) Every industrial capital, on beginning its career, throws at one fling
money into circulation for its entire fixed constituent part, which it
recovers but gradually, in the course of years, by the sale of its annual
products. Thus it throws at first more money into circulation than it
draws from it. This is repeated at every renewal of the entire capital in
kind. It is repeated every year for a certain number of enterprises whose
fixed capital is to be renewed in kind. It is repeated piecemeal at every
repair, every only partial renewal of the fixed capital. While, then, on the
one hand more money is withdrawn from circulation than is thrown into
it, the opposite takes place on the other hand.

In all lines of industry whose production period ; as distinguished
from its working period ; extends over a long term, money is continually
thrown into circulation during this period by the capitalist producers,
partly in payment for labour-power employed, partly in the purchase of
means of production to be consumed. Means of production are thus
directly withdrawn from the commodity-market, and articles of
consumption, partly indirectly, by the labourers spending their wages,
and partly directly, by the capitalists, who do not by any means suspend
their consumption, although they do not simultaneously throw any
equivalent in commodities on the market. During this period the money
thrown by them into circulation serves to convert commodity value,
including the surplus-value embodied in it, into money. This factor
becomes very important in an advanced stage of capitalist production in
the case of long-drawn out enterprises, such as are undertaken by stock
companies, etc., for instance the construction of railways, canals, docks,
large municipal buildings, iron shipbuilding, large-scale drainage of land,
etc.

3) While the other capitalists, aside from the investment in fixed
capital, draw more money out of the circulation than they threw into it
on purchasing the labour-power and the circulating elements, the gold- and
silver-producing capitalists throw only money into the circulation,
aside from the precious metal which serves as raw material, while they
withdraw only commodities from it. The constant capital, with the
exception of the depreciated portion, the greater portion of the variable
capital and the entire surplus-value, save the hoard which may be accumulating
in their own hands, are all thrown into circulation as money.

4) On the one hand all kinds of things circulate as commodities
which were not produced during the given year, such as land lots,
houses, etc.; furthermore goods whose period of production exceeds one
year, such as cattle, timber, wine, etc. For this and other phenomena it
is important to establish that aside from the quantity of money required
for the immediate circulation there is always a certain quantity in a
latent non-functioning state which may start functioning if the impulse is
given. Furthermore, the value of such products circulates often
piecemeal and gradually, like the value of houses in the rents over a
number of years.

On the other hand not all movements of the process of reproduction
are effected through the circulation of money. The entire process of
production, once its elements have been procured, is excluded from
circulation. All products which the producer himself consumes directly,
whether individually or productively, are also excluded. Under this head
comes also the feeding of agricultural labourers in kind.

Therefore the quantity of money which circulates the annual product,
exists in society, having been gradually accumulated. It does not belong
to the value produced during the given year, except perhaps the gold
used to make good the loss of depreciated coins.

This exposition presupposes the exclusive circulation of precious
metals as money, and in this circulation the simplest form of cash
purchases and sales; although money can function also as a means of
payment, and has actually done so in the course of history, even on the
basis of circulating plain metal coin, and though a credit system and
certain aspects of its mechanism have developed upon that basis.
This assumption is not made from mere considerations of method,
although these are important enough, as demonstrated by the fact that
Tooke and his school, as well as their opponents, were continually
compelled in their controversies concerning the circulation of bank-notes
to revert to the hypothesis of a purely metallic circulation. They were
forced to do so post festum and did so very superficially, which was
unavoidable, because the point of departure in their analysis thus played
merely the role of an incidental point.

But the simplest study of money ; circulation presented in its
primitive form ; and this is here an immanent element of the process of annual reproduction ; demonstrates:

a) Advanced capitalist production, and hence the domination of the
wage system, being assumed, money-capital obviously plays a
prominent role, since it is the form in which the variable capital is
advanced. In step with the development of the wage system, all
products are transformed into commodities and must therefore ; with a
few important exceptions ; pass in their entirety through the
transformation into money as one phase of their movement. The quantity
of circulating money must suffice for this conversion of commodities into
money, and the greater part of this mass is furnished in the form of
wages, of the money advanced by the industrial capitalists as the
money-form of the variable capital in payment for labour-power, and
which functions in the hands of the labourers, generally speaking, only
as a medium of circulation (means of purchase). It is quite the opposite
of natural economy such as is predominant under every form of bondage
(including serfdom), and still more so in more or less primitive
communities, whether or not they are attended by conditions of bondage
or slavery.

In the slave system, the money-capital invested in the purchase of
labour-power plays the role of the money-form of the fixed capital, which
is but gradually replaced as the active period of the slave's life expires.
Among the Athenians therefore, the gain realised by a slave owner
directly through the industrial employment of his slave, or indirectly by
hiring him out to other industrial employers (e.g., for mining), was
regarded merely as interest (plus depreciation allowance) on the
advanced money-capital, just as the industrial capitalist under capitalist
production places a portion of the surplus-value plus the depreciation of
his fixed capital to the account of interest and replacement of his fixed
capital. This is also the rule with capitalists offering fixed capital
(houses, machinery, etc.) for rent. Mere household slaves, whether they
perform necessary services or are kept as luxuries for show, are not
considered here. They correspond to the modern servant class. But the
slave system too ; so long as it is the dominant form of productive
labour in agriculture, manufacture, navigation, etc., as it was in the
advanced states of Greece and Rome ; preserves an element of natural
economy. The slave market maintains its supply of the commodity
labour-power by war, piracy, etc., and this rapine is not promoted by a
process of circulation, but by the actual appropriation of the labour-power
of others by direct physical compulsion. Even in the United
States, after the conversion of the buffer territory between the wage-labour
states of the North and the slavery states of the South into a
slave-breeding region for the South, where the slave thrown on the
market thus became himself an element of the annual reproduction, this
did not suffice for a long time, so that the African slave trade was
continued as long as possible to satisfy the market.

b) The fluxes and refluxes of money taking place spontaneously on
the basis of capitalist production in the exchange of the annual products;
the one-time advances of fixed capitals to the full extent of their value
and the successive extraction of this value from the circulation in the
course of years, in other words, their gradual reconstitution in money-form
by the annual formation of hoards, a hoarding which is essentially
different from the parallel accumulation of hoards based on the annual
production of new gold; the different lengths of time for which,
depending on the duration of the production period of the commodities,
money must be advanced, and consequently always hoarded anew
before it can be recovered from the circulation by the sale of the
commodities; the different lengths of time for which money must be advanced,
if only resulting from the different distances of the places of
production from their markets; furthermore the differences in the
magnitude and period of the reflux according to the condition or relative
size of the productive supplies in the various lines of business and in the
individual businesses of the same line, and hence the lengths of periods
for which the elements of constant capital are bought, and all this during
the year of reproduction ; all these different aspects of spontaneous
movement had only to be noted, and made conspicuous, through
experience, in order to give rise to a methodical use of the mechanical
appliances of the credit system and to a real fishing out of available
loanable capitals.

To this must be added the difference between those lines of business
whose production proceeds under otherwise normal conditions
continuously on the same scale, and those which apply varying
quantities of labour-power in different periods of the year, such as
agriculture.