(a) The Time of Purchase and Sale

The transformations of the forms of capital from commodities into money
and from money into commodities are at the same time transactions of the
capitalist, acts of purchase and sale. The time in which these transformations
of forms take place constitutes subjectively, from the standpoint of the
capitalist, the time of purchase and sale; it is the time during which
he performs the functions of a seller and buyer in the market. Just as
the time of circulation of capital is a necessary segment of its time of
reproduction, so the time in which the capitalist buys and sells and scours
the market is a necessary part of the time in which he functions as a capitalist,
i.e., as personified capital. It is a part of his business hours.

[Since we have assumed that commodities are bought and sold at
their values, these acts constitute merely the conversion of a certain
value from one form into another, from the commodity-form into the money-form
or from the money-form into the commodity-form ; a change in the state
of being. If commodities are sold at their values, then the magnitudes
of value in the hands of the buyer and seller remain unchanged. Only the
form of existence of value is changed. If the commodities are not sold
at their values, then the sum of the converted values remains unchanged;
the plus on one side is a minus on the other.

The metamorphoses C ; M and M ; C are transactions between buyers and sellers; they require time to conclude bargains, the more so as the
struggle goes on in which each seeks to get the best of the other, and
it is businessmen who face one another here; and "when Greek meets Greek then comes the tug of war." [A paraphrase of words from the 17th century tragedy The Rival Queens, or the Death of Alexander the Great by Nathaniel Lee. ; Ed.] To effect a change in the state of being costs of time and labour-power, not for the purpose of creating value, however, but in
order to accomplish the conversion of value from one form into another.
The mutual attempt to appropriate an extra slice of this value on this
occasion changes nothing. This labour, increased by the evil designs on
either side, creates no value, any more than the work performed in a judicial
proceeding increases the value of the subject matter of the suit. Matters
stand with this labour ; which is a necessary element in the capitalist
process of production as a whole, including circulation or included by
it ; as they stand, say, with the work of combustion of some substance
used for the generation of heat. This work of combustion does not generate
any heat, although it is a necessary element in the process of combustion.
In order, e.g., to consume coal as fuel, I must combine it with oxygen,
and for this purpose must transform it from the solid into the gaseous
state (for in the carbonic acid gas, the result of the combustion, coal
is in the gaseous state); consequently, I must bring about a physical change
in the form of its existence or in its state of being. The separation of
carbon molecules, which are united into a solid mass, and the splitting
up of these molecules into their separate atoms must precede the new combination,
and this requires a certain expenditure of energy which thus is not transformed
into heat but taken from it. Therefore, if the owners of the commodities
are not capitalists but independent direct producers, the time employed
in buying and selling is a diminution of their labour-time, and for this
reason such transactions used to be deferred (in ancient and medieval times)
to holidays.

Of course the dimensions assumed by the conversion of commodities
in the hands of the capitalists cannot transform this labour ; which does
not create any value ; into labour productive of value. Nor can the miracle
of this transubstantiation be accomplished by a transposition, i.e., by
the industrial capitalist making this "work of combustion" the exclusive
business of third persons, who are paid by them, instead of performing
it themselves. This third persons will of course not tender their labour-power
to the capitalist out of sheer love for them. It is a matter of indifference
to the rent collector of a real-estate owner or the messenger of a bank
that their labour does not add one iota or tittle to the value of either
the rent or the gold pieces carried to another bank by the bagful.][10]

To the capitalist who has others working for him, buying and selling
becomes a primary function. Since he appropriates the product of many on
a large social scale, he must sell it on the same scale and then reconvert
it from money into elements of production. Now as before neither the time
of purchase nor of sale creates any value. The function of merchant's capital
gives rise to an illusion. But without going into this at length here this
much is plain from the start: If by a division of labour a function, unproductive
in itself although a necessary element of reproduction, is transformed
from an incidental occupation of many into an exclusive occupation of a few,
into their special business, the nature of this function itself is not
changed. One merchant (here considered a mere agent attending to the change of form of commodities, a mere buyer and seller) may by his operations
shorten the time of purchase and sale for many producers. In such case
he should be regarded as a machine which reduces useless expenditure of
energy or helps to set production time free.[11]

In order to simplify the matter (since we shall not discuss the
merchant as a capitalist and merchant's capital until later) we shall assume
that this buying and selling agent is a man who sells his labour. He expends
his labour-power and labour-time in the operations C ; M and M ; C. And
he makes his living that way, just as another does by spinning or making
pills. He performs a necessary function, because the process of reproduction
itself includes unproductive functions. He works as well as the next man,
but intrinsically his labour creates neither value nor product. He belongs
himself to the faux frais of production. His usefulness does not
consist in transforming an unproductive function into a productive one,
nor unproductive into productive labour. It would be a miracle if such
transformation could be accomplished by the mere transfer of a function.
His usefulness consists rather in the fact that a smaller part of society's
labour-power and labour-time is tied up in this unproductive function.
More. We shall assume that he is a mere wage-labourer, even one of the
better paid, for all the difference it makes. Whatever his pay, as a wage-labourer
he works part of his time for nothing. He may receive daily the value of
the product of eight working-hours, yet functions ten. But the two hours
of surplus-labour he performs do not produce value anymore than his eight
hours of necessary labour, although by means of the latter a part of the
social product is transferred to him. In the first place, looking at it
from the standpoint of society, labour-power is used up now as before for
ten hours in a mere function of circulation. It cannot be used for anything
else, not for productive labour. In the second place however society does
not pay for those two hours of surplus-labour, although they are spent
by the individual who performs this labour. Society does not appropriate
any extra product or value thereby. But the costs of circulation, which
he represents, are reduced by one-fifth, from ten hours to eight. Society
does not pay any equivalent for one-fifth of this active time of circulation,
of which he is the agent. But if this man is employed by a capitalist,
then the non-payment of these two hours reduces the cost of circulation
of his capital, which constitutes a deduction from his income. For the capitalist this is a positive gain, because the negative limit for the self-expansion
of his capital-value is thereby reduced. So long as small independent producers
of commodities spend a part of their own time in buying and selling, this
represents nothing but time spent during the intervals between their productive
function or diminution of their time of production.

At all events the time consumed for this purpose constitutes one
of the costs of circulation which adds nothing to the converted values.
It is the cost of converting them from the commodity-form into the money-form.
The capitalist producer of commodities acting as an agent of circulation
differs from the direct producer of commodities only in the fact that he
buys and sells on a larger scale and therefore his function as such agent
assumes greater dimensions. And if the volume of his business compels or
enables him to buy (hire) circulation agents of his own to serve as wage-labourers,
the nature of the case is not changed thereby. A certain amount of labour-power
and labour-time must be expended in the process of circulation (so far
as it is merely a change of form). But this now appears as an additional
investment of capital. A part of the variable capital must be laid out
in the purchase of this labour-power functioning only in circulation. This
advance capital creates neither product nor value. It reduces pro tanto

the dimensions in which the advanced capital functions productively. It
is as though one part of the product were transformed into a machine which
buys and sells the rest of the product. This machine brings about a reduction
of the product. It does not participate in the productive process, although
it can diminish the labour-power, etc., spent on circulation. It constitutes
merely a part of the costs of circulation.