Introduction

The third book of Capital is receiving many and various
interpretations ever since it has been subject to public judgement. It was not
to be otherwise expected. In publishing it, what I was chiefly concerned with
was to produce as authentic a text as possible, to demonstrate the new results
obtained by Marx in Marx's own words as far as possible, to intervene
myself only where absolutely unavoidable, and even then to leave the reader in
no doubt as to who was talking to him. This has been deprecated. It has been
said that I should have converted the material available to me into a
systematically written book, en faire un livre, as the French say; in
other words, sacrifice the authenticity of the text to the reader's
convenience. But this was not how I conceived my task. I lacked all
justification for such a revision, a man like Marx has the right to be heard
himself, to pass on his scientific discoveries to posterity in the full
genuineness of his own presentation. Moreover, I had no desire thus to infringe
; as it must seem to me ; upon the legacy of so pre-eminent a man; it would have meant to me a breach of faith. And third, it would have been quite useless.
For the people who cannot or do not want to read, who, even in Volume I, took
more trouble to understand it wrongly than was necessary to understand it
correctly ; for such people it is altogether useless to put oneself out in any
way. But for those who are interested in a real understanding, the original text
itself was precisely the most important thing; for them my recasting would have
had at most the value of a commentary, and, what is more, a commentary on
something unpublished and inaccessible. The original text would have had to be
referred to at the first controversy, and at the second and third its
publication in extenso would have become quite unavoidable.

Such controversies are a matter of course in a work that contains so much
that is new, and in a hastily sketched and partly incomplete first draft to
boot. And here my intervention, of course, can be of use: to eliminate
difficulties in understanding, to bring more to the fore important aspects whose
significance is not strikingly enough evident in the text, and to make some
important additions to the text written in 1865 to fit the state of affairs in
1895. Indeed, there are already two points which seem to me to require a brief
discussion.