IV. Supplementary Remarks

The original source of the money for II is v + s of the gold industry I
exchanged for a part of IIc. The v + s of the producer of gold does not
enter into II only to the extent that he accumulates surplus-value or
converts it into means of production I, i.e., to the extent that he expands
his production. On the other hand, since the accumulation of money on
the part of the gold producer himself leads ultimately to reproduction on
an extended scale, a portion of the surplus-value of gold production not
spent as revenue passes as additional variable capital of the gold producer
into II, promotes here the formation of new hoards or supplies new
means with which to buy from I without selling to it direct. From the
money derived from this I(v + s) of the production of gold that portion of the gold must be deducted which certain branches of production II need as
raw material, etc., in short as an element for the replacement of their
constant capital. An element for the preliminary formation of hoards ; for
the purpose of future extended reproduction ; exists in the exchange
between I and II: for I only if part of Is is sold one-sidedly, without a
balancing purchase, to II and serves there as additional constant capital
II; for II, when the same is the case on the part of I for additional
variable capital; furthermore, if a part of the surplus-value spent by I as
revenue is not covered by IIc, hence a part of IIs is bought with it and thus converted into money. If I(v + s/x) is greater than IIc, then IIc need not for its simple reproduction replace in commodities from I what I consumed out of IIs. The question arises to what extent hoarding can take place within the sphere of exchange of capitalists II among
themselves, an exchange which can consist only of a mutual exchange
of IIs. We know that direct accumulation takes place within II by the
direct conversion of a portion of II s into variable capital (just as in I a
portion of Is is directly converted into constant capital). In the various
age categories of accumulation within the various lines of business of II,
and for the individual capitalists in each line of business, the matter is
explained mutatis mutandis in the same way as in I. Some are still in
the stage of hoarding, and sell without buying; the others are on the
point of actual expansion of reproduction, and buy without selling. The
additional variable money-capital is, true enough, first invested in
additional labour-power, but this buys means of subsistence from the
hoarding owners of the additional articles of consumption entering into
the consumption of the labourers. From these owners, pro rata to their
hoard formation, the money does not return to its point of departure.
They hoard it.

Notes

1.
This puts an end, once and for all, to the feud over the accumulation of
capital between James Mill and S. Bailey, which we have discussed from
another point of view in Book I, Ch. XXIV, 5, Note, namely, the feud concerning
the possibility of extending the operation of industrial capital without changing
its magnitude. We shall revert to this later.