III. The Turnover of the Variable Capital from the Social Point of View

Let us look at this matter for a moment from the point of view of society.
Let the wages of one labourer be &pound;1 per week, the working-day 10
hours. In case of A as well as B 100 labourers are employed during a year
(&pound;100 for 100 labourers per week, or &pound;500 for 5 weeks, or &pound;5,000
for 50 weeks), and each one of them works 60 hours per week of 6 days.
So 100 labourers work 6,000 hours per week and 300,000 hours in 50 weeks.
This labour-power is taken hold of by A and B and therefore cannot be expended
by society for anything else. To this extent the matter is the same socially
with both A and B. Furthermore: In the cases of both A and B the 100 labourers
employed by either side receive a yearly wage of &pound;5,000 (or, together
for the 200 labourers, &pound;10,000) and withdraw from society means of
subsistence to that amount. So far the matter is therefore socially the
same in the case of both A and B. Since the labourers in either case are
paid by the week, they weekly withdraw their means of subsistence from
society and, in either case, throw a weekly equivalent in money into circulation.
But here the difference begins.

First. The money which the A labourer throws into circulation is not only, as it is for the B labourer, the money-form of the value of
his labour-power (in fact a means of payment for labour already performed);
it is, counting from the second turnover period after the opening of the
business, the money-form of his own value (equal to the price of
the labour-power plus the surplus-value) created during the first period
of turnover, by which his labour is paid during the second period of turnover.
This is not the case with the B labourer. As far as the latter is concerned,
the money is here, true enough, a medium of payment for work already done
by him, but this work done is not paid for with the value which it itself
produced and which was turned into money (not with the money-form of the
value of the labour itself has produced). This cannot be done until the
beginning of the second year, when the B labourer is paid with the value
produced by him in the preceding year and turned into money.

The shorter the period of turnover of capital ; the shorter therefore
the intervals at which it is reproduced throughout the year ; the quicker
is the variable portion of the capital, originally advanced by the capitalist
in the form of money, transformed into the money-form of the value (including,
besides, surplus-value) created by the labourer to replace this variable
capital; the shorter is the time for which the capitalist must advance
money out of his own funds, and the smaller is the capital advanced by
him in general in proportion to the given scale of production; and the
greater comparatively is the quantity of surplus-value which he extracts
during the year with a given rate of surplus-value, because he can buy
the labourer so much more frequently with the money-form of the value created
by that labourer and can so much more frequently set his labour into motion
again.

If the scale of production is given, the absolute magnitude of
the advanced variable money-capital (and of the circulating capital in
general) decreased proportionately to the decrease of the turnover period,
while the annual rate of surplus-value increases. If the magnitude of the
advanced capital is given, the scale of production grows; hence, if the
rate of surplus-value is given, the absolute quantity of surplus-value
created in one period of turnover likewise grows, simultaneously with the
rise in the annual rate of surplus-value effected by the shortening of
the periods of reproduction. It generally follows from the foregoing investigation
that the different lengths of the turnover periods make it necessary for
money-capital to be advanced in very different amounts in order to set
in motion the same quantity of productive circulating capital and the same
quantity of labour with the same degree of exploitation of labour.

Second ; and this is interlinked with the first difference ; the B and A labourers pay for the means of subsistence which they buy with the variable capital that has been transformed in their hands into
a medium of circulation. For instance they not only withdraw wheat from
the market, but they also replace it with an equivalent in money. But since
the money wherewith the B labourer pays for his means of subsistence, which
he withdraws from the market, is not the money-form of a value produced
and thrown by him on the market during the year, as it is in the case of
the A labourer, he supplies the seller of the means of subsistence with
money, but not with commodities ; be they means of production or means
of subsistence ; which this seller could buy with the proceeds of the
sale, as he can in the case of A. The market is therefore stripped of labour-power,
means of subsistence for this labour-power, fixed capital in the form of
instruments of labour used in the case of B, and of materials of production,
and to replace them an equivalent in money is thrown on the market; but
during the year no product is thrown on the market with which to replace
the material elements of productive capital withdrawn from it. If we conceive
society as being not capitalistic but communistic, there will be no money-capital
at all in the first place, not the disguises cloaking the transactions
arising on account of it. The question then comes down to the need of society
to calculate beforehand how much labour, means of production, and means
of subsistence it can invest, without detriment, in such lines of business
as for instance the building of railways, which do not furnish any means
of production or subsistence, nor produce any useful effect for a long
time, a year or more, while they extract labour, means of production and
means of subsistence from the total annual production. In capitalist society
however where social reason always asserts itself only post festum
great disturbances may and must constantly occur. On the one hand pressure
is brought to bear on the money-market, while on the other, an easy money-market
calls such enterprises into being en masse, thus creating the very
circumstances which later give rise to pressure on the money-market. Pressure
is brought to bear on the money-market, since large advances of money-capital
are constantly needed here for long periods of time. And this regardless
of the fact that industrialists and merchants throw the money-capital necessary
to carry on their business into speculative railway schemes; etc., and
make it good by borrowing in the money-market.

On the other hand pressure on society's available productive capital.
Since elements of productive capital are for ever being withdrawn from
the market and only an equivalent in money is thrown on the market in their
place, the effective demand rises without itself furnishing any element
of supply. Hence a rise in the prices of productive materials as well as
means of subsistence. To this must be added that stock-jobbing is a regular
practice and capital is transferred on a large scale. A band of speculators,
contractors, engineers, lawyers, etc., enrich themselves. They create a
strong demand for articles of consumption on the market, wages rising at
the same time. So far as foodstuffs are involved, agriculture too is stimulated.
But as these foodstuffs cannot be suddenly increased in the course of the
year, their import grows, just as that of exotic foods in general (coffee,
sugar, wine, etc.) and of articles of luxury. Hence excessive imports and
speculation in this line of the import business. Meanwhile, in those branches
of industry in which production can be rapidly expanded (manufacture proper,
mining, etc.), climbing prices give rise to sudden expansion soon followed
by collapse. The same effect is produced in the labour-market, attracting
great numbers of the latent relative surplus-population, and even of the
employed labourers, to the new lines of business. In general such large-scale
undertakings as railways withdraw a definite quantity of labour-power from
the labour-market, which can come only from such lines of business as agriculture,
etc., where only strong lads are needed. This still continues even after
the new enterprises have become established lines of business and the migratory
working-class needed for them has already been formed, as for instance
in the case of temporary rise above the average in the scale of railway
construction. A portion of the reserve army of labourers, which keep wages
down, is absorbed. A general rise in wages ensues, even in the hitherto
well employed sections of the labour-market. This lasts until the inevitable
crash again releases the reserve army of labour and wages are once more
depressed to their minimum, and lower.[32]

Inasmuch as the length, great or small, of the period of turnover
depends on the working period proper, that is, the period necessary to
get the product ready for the market, it is based on the existing material
conditions of production specific for the various investments of capital.
In agriculture they assume more of the character of natural conditions
of production, in manufacture and the greater part of the mining industry
they vary with the social development of the process of production itself.

Inasmuch as the length of the working period depends on the size
of the supply (the quantitative volume in which the product is generally
thrown upon the market as commodities), it is conventional in character.
But the convention itself has its material basis in the scale of production,
and is therefore accidental only when examined singly.

Finally, inasmuch as the length of the turnover period hinges
on that of the period of circulation, it is partly dependent on the incessant
change of market conditions, the greater or lesser ease of selling, and
the resultant necessity of disposing of part of the product in nearer or
remoter markets. Apart from the volume of the demand in general, the movement
of prices is here of cardinal importance since sales are intentionally
restricted when prices are falling, while production proceeds; vice versa,
production and sales keep pace when prices are rising or sales can be made
in advance. But we must consider the actual distance of the place of production
from the market as the real material basis.

For instance English cotton goods or yarn are sold to India. Suppose
the exporter himself pays the English cotton manufacturer (the exporter
does so willingly only if the money-market is strong. But when the manufacturer
himself replaces his money-capital by some credit transaction, things are
not so good). The exporter sells his cotton goods later in the Indian market,
from where his advanced capital is remitted to him. Up to this remittance
the case runs the very same course as when the length of the working period
necessitated the advance of new money-capital to maintain the production
process on a given scale. The money-capital with which the manufacturer
pays his labourers and renews the other elements of his circulating capital
is not the money-form of the yarn produced by him. This cannot be the case
until the value of this yarn has returned to England in the form of money
or products. It is additional money-capital as before. The only difference
is that instead of the manufacturer, it is advanced by the merchant, who
in turn may well have obtained it by means of credit operations. Similarly,
before this money is thrown on the market, or simultaneously with this,
no additional product has been put on the English market that could be
bought with this money and would enter the sphere of productive or individual
consumption. If this situation continues for a rather long period of time
and on a rather large scale, it must have the same effect as the previously
mentioned prolongation of the working period.

Now it may be that in India the yarn is again sold on credit.
With this credit products are bought in India and sent as return shipment
to England or drafts remitted for this amount. If this condition is protracted,
the Indian money-market comes under pressure and the reaction on England
may here produce a crisis. This crisis, in its turn, even if connected
with bullion export to India, calls forth a new crisis in that country
on account of the bankruptcy of English firms and their Indian branches,
which had received credit from Indian banks. Thus a crisis occurs simultaneously
in the market in which the balance of trade is favourable, as well
as in the one in which it is unfavourable. This phenomenon may be
still more complicated. Assume for instance that England has sent silver
bullion to India but India's English creditors are not urgently collecting
their debts in that country, and India will soon after have to ship its
silver bullion back to England.

It is possible that the export trade to India and the import trade
from India may approximately balance each other, although the volume of
the import trade (except under special circumstances, such as a scarcity
of cotton, etc.) is determined and stimulated by the export trade. The
balance of trade between England and India may seem equilibrated or may
disclose slight oscillations in either direction. But as soon as the crisis
breaks out in England it turns out that unsold cotton goods are stored
in India (hence have not been transformed from commodity-capital into money-capital
; an over-production to this extent), and that on the other hand there
are stored up in England unsold supplies of Indian goods, and moreover,
a great portion of the sold and consumed supplies is not yet paid. Hence
what appears as a crisis on the money-market is in reality an expression
of abnormal conditions in the very process of production and reproduction.

Third. So far as the employed circulating capital itself
(constant and variable) is concerned, the length of the period of turnover,
since it derives from the working period, makes this difference: In the
case of several turnovers during one year, an element of the variable or
constant circulating capital may be supplied through its own product, for
instance in the production of coal, the ready-made clothes business, etc.
In other cases this cannot occur, at least not within the same year.

Notes

32. In the manuscript, the following note is here inserted for future amplification: "Contradiction in the capitalist
mode of production: the labourers as buyers of commodities are important
for the market. But as sellers of their own commodity ; labour-power ; 
capitalist society tends to keep them down to the minimum price.

; Further contradiction: the periods in which capitalist production exerts all its forces regularly turn out to be periods of over-production, because production potentials can never be utilised to such an extent that more value may not only be produced but also realised; but the sale of commodities, the realisation of commodity-capital and thus of surplus-value,
is limited, not by the consumer requirements of society in general, but
by the consumer requirements of a society in which the vast majority are
always poor and must always remain poor. However, this pertains to the
next part.