1. Distinctions of Form

We have seen (Buch I, Kap. VI) [English edition: Ch. VIII. ; Ed.]
that, in relation to the products toward the creation of which it contributes,
a portion of the constant capital retains that definite use-form in which
it enters into the process of production. Hence it performs the same functions
for a longer or shorter period, in ever repeated labour-processes. This
applies for instance to industrial buildings, machinery, etc. ; in short
to all things which we comprise under the name of instruments of labour.
This part of constant capital yields up value to the product in proportion
as it loses its own exchange-value together with its own use-value. This
delivery of value, or this transition of the value of such a means of production
to the product which it helps to create is determined by a calculation
of averages. It is measured by the average duration of its function, from
the moment that the means of production enters into the process of production
to the moment that it is completely spent, dead and gone, and must be replaced
by a new sample of the same kind, or reproduced.

This, then, is the peculiarity of this part of constant capital,
of the labour instruments proper:

A part of capital has been advanced in the form of constant capital,
i.e., of means of production, which function as factors of the labour-process
so long as they retain the independent use-form in which they enter this
process. The finished product, and therefore also the creators of the product,
so far as they have been transformed into product, is thrust out of the
process of production and passes as a commodity from the sphere of production
to the sphere of circulation. But the instruments of labour never leave
the sphere of production, once they have entered it. Their function holds
them there. A portion of the advanced capital-value becomes fixed
in this form determined by the function of the instruments of labour in
the process. In the performance of this function, and thus by the wear
and tear of the instruments of labour, a part of their value passes on
to the product, while the other remains fixed in the instruments of labour
and thus in the process of production. The value fixed in this way decreases
steadily, until the instrument of labour is worn out, its value having
been distributed during a shorter or longer period over a mass of products
originating from a series of constantly repeated labour-processes. But
so long as they are still effective as instruments of labour and need not
yet be replaced by new ones of the same kind, a certain amount of constant
capital-value remains fixed in them, while the other part of the value
originally fixed in them is transferred to the product and therefore circulates
as a component part of the commodity-supply. The longer an instrument lasts,
the slower it wears out, the longer will its constant capital-value remains
fixed in this use-form. But whatever may be its durability, the proportion
in which it yields value is always inverse to the entire time it functions.
If of two machines of equal value one wears out in five years and the other
in ten, then the first yields twice as much value in the same time as the
second.

This portion of the capital-value fixed in the instrument of labour
circulates as well as any other. We have seen in general that all capital-value
is constantly in circulation, and that in this sense all capital is circulating
capital. But the circulation of the portion of capital which we are now
studying is peculiar. In the first place it does not circulate in its use-form,
but it is merely its value that circulates, and this takes place gradually,
piecemeal, in proportion as it passes from it to the product, which circulates
as a commodity. During the entire period of its functioning, a part of
its value always remain fixed in it, independently of the commodities which
it helps to produce. It is this peculiarity which gives to this portion
of constant capital the form of fixed capital. All the other material
parts of capital advanced in the process of production form by way of contrast
the circulating, or fluid, capital.

Some means of production do not enter materially into the product.
Such are auxiliary materials, which are consumed by the instruments of
labour themselves in the performance of their functions, like coal consumed
by a steam-engine; or which merely assist in the operation, like gas for
lighting, etc. It is only their value which forms a part of the value of
the products. The product circulates in its own circulation the value of
these means of production. This feature they have in common with fixed
capital. But they are entirely consumed in every labour-process which they
enter and must therefore be wholly replaced by new means of production
of the same kind in every new labour-process. They do not preserve their
independent use-form while performing their function. Hence while they
function no portion of capital-value remains fixed in their old use-form,
their bodily form, either. The circumstance that this portion of the auxiliary
materials does not pass bodily into the product but enters into the value
of the product only according to its own value, as a portion of that value,
and what hangs together with this, namely, that the function of these substances
is strictly confined to the sphere of production, has misled economists
like Ramsay (who at the same time got fixed capital mixed up with constant
capital) to classify them as fixed capital. [Karl Marx, Theorien über
den Mehrwert (Vierter Band des Kapitals), 3. Teil, Berlin, 1962, SS. 323-25.
; Ed.]

That part of the means of production which bodily enters into
the product, i.e., raw materials, etc., thus assumes in part forms which
enable it later to enter into individual consumption as articles of use.
The instruments of labour properly so called, the material vehicles of
the fixed capital, are consumed only productively and cannot enter into
individual consumption, because they do not enter into the product, or
the use-value, which they held to create but retain their independent form
with reference to it until they are completely worn out. The means of transportation
are an exception to this rule. The useful effect which they produce during
the performance of their productive function, hence during their stay in
the sphere of production, the change of location, passes simultaneously
into the individual use in the same way in which he pays for the use of
other articles of consumption. We have seen [Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I,
pp. 181-82. ; Ed.] that for instance in chemical manufacture raw
and auxiliary materials blend. The same applies to instruments of labour
and auxiliary and raw materials. Similarly in agriculture the substances
added for the improvement of the soil pass partly into the plants raised
and help to form the product. On the other hand their effect is distributed
over a lengthy period, say four or five years. A portion of them therefore
passes bodily into the product and thus transfers its value to the product
while the other portion remains fixed in its old use-form and retains its
value. It persists as a means of production and consequently keeps the
form of fixed capital. As a beast of toil an ox is fixed capital. If he
is eaten, he no longer functions as an instrument of labour, nor as fixed
capital either.

What determines that a portion of the capital-value invested in
means of production is endowed with the character of fixed capital is exclusively
the peculiar manner in which this value circulates. This specific manner
of circulation arises from the specific manner in which the instrument
of labour transmits its value to the product, or in which it behaves as
a creator of values during the process of production. This manner again
arises from the special way in which the instruments of labour function
in the labour-process.

We know that a use-value which emerges as a product from one labour-process
enters into another as a means of production. [Karl Marx, Capital, Vol.
I, p. 181. ; Ed.] It is only the functioning of a product as an
instrument of labour in the process of production that makes it fixed capital.
But when it itself only just emerges from a process, it is by no means
fixed capital. For instance a machine, as a product or commodity of the
machine-manufacturer, belongs to his commodity-capital. It does not become
fixed capital until it is employed productively in the hands of its purchaser,
the capitalist.

All other circumstances being equal, the degree of fixity increases
with the durability of the instrument of labour. It is this durability
that determines the magnitude of the difference between the capital-value
fixed in instruments of labour and that part of its value which it yields
to the product in repeated labour-processes. The slower this value is yielded
; and value is given up by the instrument of labour in every repetition
of the labour-process ; the larger is the fixed capital and the greater
the difference between the capital employed in the process of production
and the capital consumed in it. As soon as this difference has disappeared
the instrument of labour has outlived its usefulness and has lost with
its use-value also its value. It has ceased to be the depository of value.
Since an instrument of labour, like every other material carrier of constant
capital, parts with value to the product only to the extent that together
with its use-value it loses its value, it is evident that the more slowly
its use-value is lost, the longer it lasts in the process of production,
the longer is the period in which constant capital-value remains fixed
in it.

If a means of production which is not an instrument of labour
strictly speaking, such as auxiliary substances, raw material, partly finished
articles, etc., behaves with regard to value yield and hence manner of
circulation of its value in the same way as the instruments of labour,
then it is likewise a material depository, a form of existence, of fixed
capital. This is the case with the above-mentioned improvements of the
soil, which add to it chemical substances whose influence is distributed
over several periods of production or years. Here a portion of the value
continues to exist alongside the product, in its independent form or in
the form of fixed capital, while the other portion of the value has been
delivered to the product and therefore circulates with it. In this case
it is not alone a portion of the value of the fixed capital which enters
into the product, but also the use-value, the substance, in which this
portion of value exists.

Apart from the fundamental mistake ; the mixing up of the categories
"fixed" and "circulating capital" with the categories "constant" and "variable capital" ; the confusion of the economists hitherto in the definitions of concepts is based first of all on the following points:

One turns certain properties materially inherent in instruments
of labour into direct properties of fixed capital; for instance physical
immobility, say, of a house. However it is always easy to prove in such
case that other instruments of labour, which as such are likewise fixed
capital, possess the opposite property: for instance physical mobility,
say, of a ship.

Or one confuses the economic definiteness of form which arises
from the circulation of value with an objective property; as if objects
which in themselves are not capital at all but rather become so only under
definite social conditions could in themselves and in their very
nature be capital in some definite form, fixed or circulating. We have
seen (Buch I, Kap. V) [English edition: Ch. VII. ; Ed.] that the
means of production in every labour-process, regardless of the social conditions
in which it takes place, are divided into instruments of labour and subjects
of labour. But both of them become capital only under the capitalist mode
of production, when they become "productive capital," as shown in the preceding part. 
Thus the distinction between instruments of labour and subject of
labour, which is grounded on the nature of the labour-process, is reflected
in a new form: the distinction between fixed capital and circulating capital.
It is only then that a thing which performs the function of an instrument
of labour becomes fixed capital. If owing to its material properties it
can function also in other capacities than that of instrument of labour,
it may be fixed capital or not, depending on the specific function it performs.
Cattle as beasts of toil are fixed capital; as beef cattle they are raw
material which finally enters into circulation as a product; hence they
are circulating, not fixed capital.

The mere fixation of a means of production for a considerable
length of time in repeated labour-processes, which however are connected,
continuous, and therefore form a production period ; i.e., the entire
time of production required to finish a certain product ; obliges the
capitalist, just as fixed capital does, to make his advances for a longer
or shorter term, but this does not make his capital fixed capital. Seeds
for instance are not fixed capital, but only raw material which is held
for about a year in the process of production. All capital is held in the
process of production so long as it functions as productive capital, and
so are therefore all elements of productive capital, whatever their material
forms, their functions and the modes of circulation of their values. Whether
this period of fixation lasts a long or a short time ; a matter depending
on the kind of process of production involved or the useful effect aimed
at ; this does not effect the distinction between fixed and circulating
capital.[20]

A part of the instruments of labour, which includes the general
instruments of labour, is either localised as soon as it enters the process
of production as an instrument of labour, i.e., is prepared for its productive
function, such as for instance machinery, or is produced from the outset
in its immovable, localised form, such as improvements of the soil, factory
buildings, blast furnaces, canals, railways, etc. The constant attachment
of the instrument of labour to the process of production in which it is
to function is here also due to its physical mode of existence. On the
other hand an instrument of labour may physically change continually from
place to place, may move about, and nevertheless be constantly in the process
of production; for instance a locomotive, a ship, beasts of burden, etc.
Neither does immobility in the one case bestow upon it the character of
fixed capital, nor does mobility in the other case deprive it of this character.
But the fact that some instruments of labour are localised, attached to
the soil by their roots, assigns to this portion of fixed capital a peculiar
role in the economy of nations. They cannot be sent abroad, cannot circulate
as commodities in the world-market. Title to this fixed capital may change,
it may be bought and sold, and to this extent may circulate ideally. These
titles of ownership may even circulate in foreign markets, for instance
in the form of stocks. But a change of the persons owning this class of
fixed capital does not alter the relation of the immovable, materially
fixed part of the national wealth to its movable part.[21]

The peculiar circulation of fixed capital results in a peculiar
turnover. That part of the value which it loses in its bodily form by wear
and tear circulates as a part of the value of the product. The product
converts itself by means of its circulation from commodities into money;
hence the same applies to the value-part of the instrument of labour circulated
by the product, and this value drips down in the form of money from the
process of circulation in proportion as this instrument of labour ceases
to be a depository of value in the process of production. Its value thus
acquires a double existence. One part of it remains attached to its use-form
or bodily form belonging in the process of production. The other part detaches
itself from that form in the shape of money. In the performance of its
function that part of the value of an instrument of labour which exists
in its bodily form constantly decreases, while that which is transformed
into money constantly increases until the instrument is at last exhausted
and its entire value, detached from its corpse, is converted into money.
Here the peculiarity of the turnover of this element of productive capital
becomes apparent. The transformation of its value into money keeps pace
with the pupation into money of the commodity which is the carrier of its
value. But its reconversion from the money-form into a use-form proceeds
separately from the reconversion of the commodities into other elements
of their production and is determined rather by its own period of reproduction,
that is, by the time during which the instrument of labour wears out and
must be replaced by another of the same kind. If a machine worth &pound;10,000
lasts for, say, a period of ten years, then the period of turnover of the
value originally advanced for it amounts to ten years. It need not be renewed
and continues to function in its bodily form until this period has expired.
In the meantime its value circulates piecemeal as a part of the value of
the commodities whose continuous production it serves and it is thus gradually
transformed into money until finally at the end of ten years it entirely
assumes the form of money and is reconverted from money into a machine,
in other words, has completed its turn-over. Until this time of reproduction
arrives, its value is gradually accumulated, in the form of a money reserve
fund to start with.

The remaining elements of productive capital consist partly of
those elements of constant capital which exist as auxiliary and raw materials,
partly of variable capital invested in labour-power.

The analysis of the labour-process and of the process of producing
surplus-value (Buch I, Kap. V) [English edition: Ch. VII. ; Ed.]
showed that these different components behave quite differently as creators
of products and as creators of values. The value of that part of constant
capital which consists of auxiliary and raw materials ; the same as of
that part which consists of instruments of labour ; re-appears in the
value of the product as only transferred value, while labour-power adds
an equivalent of its value to the product by means of the labour-process,
in other words, actually reproduces its value. Furthermore, one part of
the auxiliary substances ; fuel, lighting gas, etc. ; is consumed in
the process of labour without entering bodily into the product, while the
other part of them enters bodily into the product and forms its material
substance. But all these differences are immaterial so far as the circulation
and therefore the mode of turnover is concerned. Since auxiliary and raw
materials are entirely consumed in the creation of the product, they transfer
their value entirely to the product. Hence this value is circulated in
its entirety by the product, transforms itself into money and from money
back into the elements of production of the commodity. Its turnover is
not interrupted, as is that of fixed capital, but passes uninterruptedly
through the entire circuit of its forms, so that these elements of productive
capital are continually renewed in kind.

As for the variable component of productive capital, which is
invested in labour-power, be it noted that labour-power is purchased for
a definite period of time. As soon as the capitalist has bought it and
embodied it in the process of production, it forms a component part of
his capital, its variable component. Labour-power acts daily during the
period of time in which it adds to the product not only its own value for
the whole day but also a surplus-value in excess of it. We shall not consider
this surplus-value for the present. After labour-power has been bought
and it has performed its function, say for a week, its purchase must be
constantly renewed within the customary intervals of time. The equivalent
of its value, which the labour-power adds to the product during its functioning
and which is transformed into money in consequence of the circulation of
the product, must continually be reconverted from money into labour-power
or continually pass through the complete circuit of its forms, that is,
must be turned over, if the circuit of continuous production is not to
be interrupted.

Hence that part of the value of the productive capital which has
been advanced for labour-power is entirely transferred to the product (we
constantly leave the question of surplus-value out of consideration here),
passes with it through the two metamorphoses belonging in the sphere of
circulation and always remains incorporated in the process of production
by virtue of this continuous renewal. Hence, however different otherwise
may be the relation between labour-power, so far as the creation of value
is concerned, and the component parts of constant capital which do not
constitute fixed capital, this kind of turnover of its value labour-power
shares with them, in contradistinction to fixed capital. These components
of the productive capital ; the parts of its value invested in labour-power
and in means of production which do not constitute fixed capital ; by
reason of their common turnover characteristics confront the fixed capital
as circulating or fluent capital.

We have already shown [Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Ch. VI, pp.
167-76. ; Ed.] that the money which the capitalist pays to the
labourer for the use of his labour-power is nothing more or less than the
form of the general equivalent for the means of subsistence required by
the labourer. To this extent, the variable capital consists in substance
of means of subsistence. But in this case, where we are discussing turnover,
it is a question of form. The capitalist does not buy the labourer's means
of subsistence but his labour-power. And that which forms the variable
part of his capital is not the labourer's means of subsistence but his
labour-power in action. What the capitalist consumes productively in the
labour-process is the labour-power itself and not the labourer's means
of subsistence. It is the labourer himself who converts the money received
for his labour-power into means of subsistence, in order to reconvert them
into labour-power, to keep alive, just as the capitalist for instance converts
a part of the surplus-value of the commodities he sells for money into
means of subsistence for himself without thereby warranting the statement
that the purchaser of his commodities pays him in means of subsistence.
Even if the labourer is paid a part of his wages in means of subsistence,
in kind, this nowadays amounts to a second transaction. He sells his labour-power
at a certain price, with the understanding that he shall receive a part
of this price in means of subsistence. This changes merely the form of
the payment, but not the fact that what he actually sells is his labour-power.
It is a second transaction, which does not take place between the labourer
and the capitalist, but between the labourer as a buyer of commodities
and the capitalist as a seller of commodities, while in the first transaction
the labourer is a seller of a commodity (his labour-power) and the capitalist
its buyer. It is exactly the same as if a capitalist, on selling his commodity,
say, a machine, to an iron works, has it replaced by some other commodity,
say, iron. It is therefore not the labourer's means of subsistence which
acquire the definite character of circulating capital as opposed to fixed
capital. Nor is it his labour-power. It is rather that part of the value
of productive capital which is invested in labour-power and which, by virtue
of the form of its turnover, receives this character in common with some,
and in contrast with other, component parts of the constant capital.

The value of the circulating capital ; in labour-power and means
of production ; is advanced only for the time during which the product
is in process of production, in accordance with the scale of production
determined by the volume of the fixed capital. This value enters entirely
into the product, is therefore fully returned by its sale from the sphere
of circulation, and can be advanced anew. The labour-power and means of
production, in which the circulating component of capital exists, are withdrawn
from circulation to the extent required for the creation and sale of the
finished product, but they must be continually replaced and renewed by
purchasing them back, by reconverting them from the money-form into the
elements of production. They are withdrawn from the market in smaller quantities
at a time than the elements of fixed capital, but they must be withdrawn
again from it so much the more frequently and the advance of capital invested
in them must be renewed at shorter intervals. This constant renewal is
effected by the continuous conversion of the product which circulates their
entire value. And finally, they pass through the entire circuit of metamorphoses,
not only so far as their value is concerned but also their material form.
They are perpetually reconverted from commodities into the elements of
production of the same commodities.

Together with its own value, labour-power always adds to the product
surplus-value, the embodiment of unpaid labour. This is continuously circulated
by the finished product and converted into money just as are other elements
of its value. But here, where we are primarily concerned with the turnover
of capital-value, and not with that of the surplus-value occurring at the
same time, we dismiss the latter for the present.

From the foregoing one may conclude the following:

1. The definiteness of form of fixed and circulating capital arises
merely from the different turnovers of the capital-value, functioning in
the process of production, or of the productive capital. This difference
in turnover arises in its turn from the different manner in which the various
components of productive capital transfer their value to the product; it
is not due to the different parts played by these components in the generation
of product value, nor to their characteristic behaviour in the process
of self-expansion. Finally the difference in the delivery of value to the
product ; and therefore the different manner in which this value is circulated
by the product and is renewed in its original bodily form through the metamorphoses
of the product ; arises from the difference of the material shapes in
which the productive capital exists, one portion of it being entirely consumed
during the creation of an individual product and the other being used up
only gradually. Hence it is only the productive capital which can be divided
into fixed and circulating capital. But this antithesis does not apply
to the other two modes of existence of industrial capital, that is to say,
commodity-capital and money-capital, nor does it exist as an antithesis
of these two modes to productive capital. It exists only for productive
capital and within its sphere. No matter how much money-capital and
commodity-capital may function as capital and no matter how fluently they
may circulate, they cannot become circulating capital as distinct from
fixed capital until they are transformed into circulating components of
productive capital. But because these two forms of capital dwell in the
sphere of circulation, Political Economy as we shall see has been misled
since the time of Adam Smith into lumping them together with the circulating
part of productive capital and assigning them to the category of circulating
capital. They are indeed circulation capital in contrast to productive
capital, but they are not circulating capital in contrast to fixed capital.

2. The turnover of the fixed component part of capital, and therefore
also the time of turnover necessary for it, comprises several turnovers
of the circulating constituents of capital. In the time during which the
fixed capital turns over once, the circulating capital turns over several
times. One of the component parts of the value of the productive capital
acquires the definiteness of form of fixed capital only in case the means
of production in which it exists is not wholly worn out in the time required
for the fabrication of the product and its expulsion from the process of
production as a commodity. One part of its value must remain tied up in
the form of the still preserved old use-form, while the other part is circulated
by the finished product, and this circulation on the contrary simultaneously
circulates the entire value of the fluent component parts of the capital.

3. The value-part of the productive capital, the part invested
in fixed capital, is advanced in one lump sum for the entire period of
employment of that part of the means of production of which the fixed capital
consists. Hence this value is thrown into the circulation by the capitalist
all at one time. But it is withdrawn again from the circulation only piecemeal
and gradually by realising the parts of value which the fixed capital adds
piecemeal to the commodities. On the other hand the means of production
themselves, in which a component part of the productive capital becomes
fixed, are withdrawn from the circulation all at one time to be embodied
in the process of production for the entire period in which they function.
But they do not require for this period any replacement by new samples
of the same kind, do not require reproduction. They continue for a longer
or shorter period to contribute to the creation of the commodities thrown
into circulation without withdrawing from circulation the elements of
their own renewal. Hence they do not require from the capitalist a renewal
of his advance during this period. Finally the capital-value invested in
fixed capital does not pass bodily through the circuit of its forms, during
the functioning period of the means of production in which this capital-value
exists, but only as concerns its value, and even this it does only parts
and gradually. In other words, a portion of its value is continually circulated
and converted into money as a part of the value of the commodities, without
being reconverted from money into its original bodily form. This reconversion
of money into the bodily form of the means of production does not take
place until the end of its functioning period, when the means of production
has been completely consumed.

4. The elements of circulating capital are as permanently fixed
in the process of production ; if it is to be uninterrupted ; as the
elements of fixed capital. But the elements of circulating capital thus
fixed are continually renewed in kind (the means of production by new products
of the same kind, labour-power by constantly renewed purchases) while in
the case of the elements of fixed capital neither they themselves are renewed
nor need their purchases be renewed so long as they continue to exist.
There are always raw and auxiliary materials in the process of production,
but always new products of the same kind, after the old elements have been
consumed in the creation of the finished product. Labour-power likewise
always exists in the process of production, but only by means of ever new
purchases, frequently involving changes of persons. But the same identical
buildings, machines, etc., continue to function, during repeated turnovers
of the circulating capital, in the same repeated processes of production.