I. Simple Reproduction

In the case of simple reproduction the surplus-value produced and realised
annually, or periodically, if there are several turnovers during the year,
is consumed individually, that is to say, unproductively, by its owner,
the capitalist.

The circumstance that the value of the product consists in part
of surplus-value and in part of that portion of value which is formed by
the variable capital reproduced in the product plus the constant capital
consumed by it, does not alter anything whatever either in the quantity
or in the value of the total product, which constantly steps into circulation
as commodity-capital and is just as constantly withdrawn from it, in order
to be productively or individually consumed, i.e., to serve as means of
production or consumption. If constant capital is left aside, only the
distribution of the annual product between the labourers and the capitalists
is affected thereby.

Even if simple reproduction is assumed, a portion of the surplus-value
must therefore always exist in the form of money and not of products, because
otherwise it could not be converted for purposes of consumption from money
into products. This conversion of the surplus-value from its original commodity-form
into money must be further analysed at this place. In order to simplify
the matter, we shall presuppose the most elementary form of the problem,
namely the exclusive circulation of metal coin, of money which is a real
equivalent.

According to the laws of the simple circulation of commodities
(developed in Buch I, Kap. III), [English edition: Volume I, Ch. III. ; Ed.]
the mass of the metal coin existing in a country must not only be sufficient
to circulate the commodities, but must also suffice to meet the currency
fluctuations, which arise partly from fluctuations in the velocity of the
circulation, partly from a change in the prices of commodities, partly
from the various and varying proportions in which the money functions as
a medium of payment or as a medium of circulation proper. The proportion
in which the existing quantity of money is split into a hoard and money
in circulation varies continually, but the total quantity of money is always
equal to the sum of the money hoarded and the money circulating. This quantity
of money (quantity of precious metal) is a gradually accumulated hoard
of society. Since a portion of this hoard is consumed by wear and tear,
it must be replaced annually, the same as any other product. This takes
place in reality by a direct or indirect exchange of a part of the annual
product of a particular country for the product of countries producing
gold and silver. However, this international character of the transaction
conceals its simple course. In order to reduce the problem to its simplest
and most lucid expression, it must be assumed that the production of gold
and silver takes place in that particular country itself, that therefore
the production of gold and silver constitutes a part of the total social
production within every country.

Apart from the gold and silver produced for articles of luxury,
the minimum of their annual production must be equal to the wear of metal
coin annually occasioned by the circulation of money. Furthermore, if the
sum of the values of the annually produced and circulating quantity of
commodities increases, the annual production of gold and silver must likewise
increase, inasmuch as the increased sum of values of the circulating commodities
and the quantity of money required for their circulation (and the corresponding
formation of a hoard) are not made good by a greater velocity of money
currency and a more comprehensive function of money as a medium of payment,
i.e., by a greater mutual balancing of purchases and sales without the
intervention of actual money.

A portion of the social labour-power and a portion of the social
means of production must therefore be expended annually in the production
of gold and silver.

The capitalists who are engaged in the production of gold and
silver and who, according to our assumption of simple reproduction, carry
on their production only within the bounds of the annual average wear and
tear and the annual average consumption of gold and silver entailed thereby
throw their surplus-value ; which they consume annually, according to
our assumption, without capitalising any of it ; directly into circulation
in the money-form, which is its natural form; unlike the other branches
of production, where it is the converted form of the product.

Furthermore, as far as wages are concerned ; the money-form in
which the variable capital is advanced ; they are also not replaced by
the sale of the product, by its conversion into money, but by a product
itself whose natural form is from the outset that of money.

Finally the same applies also to that portion of the product of
precious metals which is equal to the value of the periodically consumed
constant capital, both the constant circulating and constant fixed capital
consumed during the year.

Let us consider the circuit, or turnover, of the capital invested
in the production of precious metals first in the form of M ; C ... P
... M'. Since C in M ; C consists not only of labour-power and means
of production but also of fixed capital, only a part of whose value is
consumed in P, it is evident that M', the product, is a sum of money equal
to the variable capital laid out in wages plus the circulating constant
capital laid out in means of production plus a portion of the value equivalent
to the worn-out fixed capital plus the surplus-value. If the sum were smaller,
the general value of gold remaining the same, then the mine would be unproductive
or, if this got to be generally the case, the value of gold compared with
the value of commodities that remains unchanged would subsequently rise;
i.e., the prices of commodities would fall, so that henceforth the amount
of money laid out in M ; C would be smaller.

If we consider at first only the circulating portion of capital
advanced in M, the starting-point of M ; C ... P ... M', we find that
a certain sum of money is advanced, thrown into circulation for the payment
of labour-power and the purchase of materials of production. But this sum
is not withdrawn from circulation by the circuit of this capital,
in order to be thrown into it anew. The product is money even in its bodily
form; there is no need therefore of transforming it into money by means
of exchange, by a process of circulation. It passes from the process of
production into the sphere of circulation, not in the form of commodity-capital
which has to be reconverted in money-capital, but as money-capital which
is to be reconverted into productive capital, i.e., which is to buy fresh
labour-power and materials of production. The money-form of the circulating
capital consumed in labour-power and means of production is replaced, not
by the sale of the product, but by the bodily form of the product itself;
hence, not by once more withdrawing its value from circulation in money-form,
but by additional newly produced money.

Let us suppose that this circulating capital is &pound;500, the
period of turnover 5 weeks, the working period 4 weeks, the period of circulation
only 1 week. From the outset, money for 5 weeks must be partly advanced
for a productive supply, and partly be ready to be paid out gradually in
wages. At the beginning of the 6th week, &pound;400 will have returned
and &pound;100 will have been released. This is constantly repeated. Here,
as in previous cases, &pound;100 will always be found in released form
during a certain time of the turnover. But they consist of additional,
newly produced, money, the same as the other &pound;400. We have in this
case 10 turnovers per year and the annual product is &pound;5,000 in gold.
(The period of circulation is not constituted, in this case, by the time
required for the conversion of commodities into money, but by that required
for the conversion of money into the elements of production.)

In the case of every other capital of &pound;500 turned over under
the same conditions, the ever renewed money-form is the converted form
of the commodity-capital produced and thrown into circulation every 4 weeks
and which by its sale ; that is to say, by a periodical withdrawal of
the quantity of money it represented when it originally entered into the
process ; assumes this money-form anew over and over again. Here, on the
contrary, in every turnover period a new additional &pound;500 in money
is thrown from the process of production itself into circulation, in order
to withdraw from it continually materials of production and labour-power.
This money thrown into circulation is not withdrawn from it again by the
circuit which this capital describes, but is rather increased by quantities
of gold constantly produced anew.

Let us look at the variable portion of this circulating capital,
and assume that it is, as before, &pound;100. Then these &pound;100 would
be sufficient in the ordinary production of these commodities, with 10
turnovers, to pay continually for the labour-power. Here, in the production
of gold, the same amount is sufficient. But the &pound;100 of the reflux,
with which the labour-power is paid every 5 weeks, are not a converted
form of its product but a portion of this ever renewed product itself.
The producer of gold pays his labourers directly with a portion of the
gold they themselves produced. The &pound;1,000 thus expended annually
in labour-power and thrown by the labourers into circulation do not return
therefore via this circulation to their starting-point.

Furthermore, so far as the fixed capital is concerned, it requires
the investment of a comparatively large money-capital on the original establishment
of the business, and this capital is thus thrown into circulation. Like
all fixed capital it returns only piecemeal in the course of years. But
it returns as a direct portion of the product, of the gold, not by the
sale of the product and its consequent conversion into money. In other
words, it gradually assumes its money-form not by a withdrawal of money
from the circulation but by an accumulation of a corresponding portion
of the product. The money-capital so restored is not a quantity of money
gradually withdrawn from the circulation to compensate for the sum originally
thrown into it for the fixed capital. It is an additional sum of money.

Finally, as concerns the surplus-value, it is likewise equal to
a certain portion of the new gold product, which is thrown into the circulation
in every new period of turnover in order to be unproductively expended,
according to our assumption, on means of subsistence and articles of luxury.

But according to our assumption, the entire annual production
of gold ; which continually withdraws labour-power and materials of production,
but no money, from the market, while continuously adding fresh quantities
of money to it ; merely replaces the money worn out during the year, hence
only keeps intact the quantity of social money which exists constantly,
although in varying portions, in the two forms of hoarded money and money
in circulation.

According to the law of the circulation of commodities, the quantity
of money must be equal to the amount of money required for circulation
plus a certain amount held in the form of a hoard, which increases or decreases
as the circulation contracts or expands, and serves especially for the
formation of the requisite reserve funds of means of payment. What must
be paid in money in so far as there is no balancing of accounts ; is the
value of the commodities. The fact that a portion of this value consists
of surplus-value, that is to say, did not cost the seller of the commodities
anything, does not alter the matter in any way. Let us suppose that the
producers are all independent owners of their means of production, so that
circulation takes place between the immediate producers themselves. Apart
from the constant portion of their capital, their annual value-product
might then be divided into two parts, analogous with capitalist conditions:
Part a, replacing only the necessary means of subsistence, and part b,
consumed partly in articles of luxury, partly for an expansion of production.
Part a then represents the variable capital, part b the surplus-value.
But this division would remain without influence on the magnitude of the
sum of money required for the circulation of their total product. Other
circumstances remaining equal, the value of the circulating mass of commodities
would be the same, and thus also the amount of money required for that
value. They would also have to have the same money-reserves if the turnover
periods are equally divided, i.e., the same portion of their capital would
always have to be held in the form of money, because their production,
according to our assumption, would be commodity production, the same as
before. Hence the fact that a portion of the value of the commodities consists
of surplus-value would change absolutely nothing in the quantity of the
money required for the running of the business.

An opponent of Tooke, who clings to the formula M ; C ; M', asks
him how the capitalist manages always to withdraw more money from circulation
than he throws into it. Mind you! The question at issue here is not the
formation of surplus-value. This, the only secret, is a matter of
course from the capitalist standpoint. The sum of values employed would
not be capital if it did not enrich itself by means of surplus-value. But
as it is capital by assumption, surplus-value is taken for granted.

The question, then, is not where the surplus-value comes from
but whence the money comes into which it is turned.

But in bourgeois economics, the existence of surplus-value is
self-understood. It is therefore not only assumed but also connected with
the further assumption that a part of the mass of commodities thrown into
circulation is a surplus-product, hence representing a value which the
capitalist did not throw into circulation as part of his capital; that,
consequently, with his product the capitalist throws into circulation a
surplus over and above his capital, and that he withdraws this surplus
from it.

The commodity-capital, which the capitalist throws into circulation,
has a greater value (it is not explained and remains obscure where this
comes from, but the above Political Economy considers it a fact) than the
productive capital which he withdrew from circulation in the form of labour-power
plus means of production. On the basis of this assumption it is evident
why not only capitalist A, but also B, C, D, etc., are always able to withdraw
more value from circulation by the exchange of their commodities than the
value of the capital originally and repeatedly advanced by them. A, B,
C, D, and the rest continuously throw a greater commodity-value into circulation
in the form of commodity-capital ; this operation is as many-sided as
the various independently functioning capitals ; than they withdraw from
it in the form of productive capital. Hence they have constantly to divide
among themselves a sum of values (i.e., everyone, on his part, has to withdraw
from circulation a productive capital) equal to the sum of values of the
productive capitals they respectively advanced; and just as constantly
they have to divide among themselves a sum of values which they all, from
all sides, throw into circulation in the form of commodities representing
the respective excesses of the commodity-values above the values of their
elements of production.

But the commodity-capital must be turned into money before its
reconversion into productive capital and before the surplus-value contained
in it is spent. Where does the money for this purpose come from? This question
seems difficult at the first glance and neither Tooke nor any one else
has answered it so far.

Let the circulating capital of &pound;500 advanced in the form
of money-capital, whatever its period of turnover, now stand for the total
circulating capital of society, that is, of the capitalist class. Let the
surplus-value be &pound;100. How can the entire capitalist class manage
to draw continually &pound;600 out of circulation, when it continually
throws only &pound;500 into it?

After the money-capital of &pound;500 has been converted into
productive capital, the latter transforms itself within the process of
production into commodities worth &pound;600 and there are in circulation
not only commodities valued at &pound;500, equal to the money-capital originally
advanced, but also a newly produced surplus-value of &pound;100.

This additional surplus-value of &pound;100 is thrown into circulation
in the form of commodities. No doubt about that. But such an operation
does not by any means furnish the additional money for the circulation
of this additional commodity-value.

It will not do to obviate this difficulty by plausible subterfuges.

For instance: So far as the constant circulating capital is concerned,
it is obvious that not all invest it simultaneously. While capitalist A
sells his commodities, so that his advanced capital assumes the form of
money, there is on the other hand the available money-capital of the buyer
B which assumes the form of his means of production ; precisely what A
is producing. By the same act through which A restores the money-form to
his produced commodity-capital, B returns his capital to its productive
form, transforms it from money-form into means of production and labour-power;
the same amount of money functions in the two-sided process as in every
simple purchase C ; M. On the other hand when A reconverts his money into
means of production, he buys from C, and this man pays B with it, etc.,
and thus the transaction would be explained. But:

None of the laws established with reference to the quantity of
the circulating money in the circulation of commodities (Buch I, Kap. III),
[English edition: Volume I, Ch. III. ; Ed.] are changed in any way by the
capitalist character of the process of production.

Hence, when one says that the circulating capital of society to
be advanced in the form of money amounts to &pound;500, one has already
taken into account that this is on the one hand the sum simultaneously
advanced, and that on the other hand it sets in motion more productive
capital than &pound;500 because it serves alternately as the money-form
of various productive capitals. This manner of explanation, then, assumes
the money, whose existence it is called upon to explain, as already existing.

It might be further said: Capitalist A produces articles which
capitalist B consumes individually, unproductively. B's money therefore
turns A's commodity-capital into money and thus the same sum of money serves
to realise B's surplus-value and A's circulating constant capital. But
in that case the question that still awaits solution is assumed still more
directly to have been solved, namely: where does B get the money that makes
up his revenue? How did he himself realise this portion of the surplus-value
of his product?

It might also be said that the part of the circulating variable
capital which A steadily advances to his labourers returns to him steadily
from the circulation, and only a varying part of it always stays with him
for the payment of wages. But a certain time elapses between the expenditure
and the reflux, and meanwhile the money paid out for wages might, among
other uses, serve for the realisation of surplus-value.

But we know in the first place that the longer this time the greater
must be the supply of money which capitalist A must keep constantly in
petto. In the second place the labourer spends the money, buys commodities
for it and thus converts into money pro tanto the surplus-value
contained in them. Consequently the same money that is advanced in the
form of variable capital serves pro tanto also the purpose of turning
surplus-value into money. Without penetrating any further into the question
at this point, let this suffice: the consumption of the entire capitalist
class and its retainers keeps step with that of the working-class; hence
simultaneously with the money thrown into circulation by the labourers
the capitalists too must throw money into it, in order to spend their surplus-value
as revenue. Hence money must be withdrawn from circulation for it. This
explanation would serve merely to reduce, but not eliminate, the quantity
of money required.

Finally, it might be said: A large amount of money is constantly
thrown into circulation when fixed capital is first invested, and it is
recovered from the circulation only gradually, piecemeal, after a lapse
of years, by him who threw it into circulation. Cannot this sum suffice
to convert the surplus-value into money?

The answer to this must be that perhaps the sum of &pound;500
(which includes hoard formation for needed reserve funds) implies its employment
as fixed capital, if not by him who threw it into circulation, then by
somebody else. Besides, it is already assumed in regard to the amount expended
for the procurement of products serving as fixed capital that the surplus-value
contained in them is also paid, and the question is precisely where this
money comes from.

The general reply has already been given: If a mass of commodities
worth x times &pound;1,000 has to circulate, it changes absolutely nothing
in the quantity of the money required for this circulation whether the
value of this mass of commodities has been produced capitalistically or
not. The problem itself therefore does not exist. All other conditions
being given, such as velocity of the currency of money, etc., a definite
sum of money is required in order to circulate commodities worth x times
&pound;1,000 quite independently of how much or how little of this value
falls to the share of the direct producers of these commodities. So far
as any problem exists here, it coincides with the general problem: Where
does the money required for the circulation of the commodities of a country
come from?

However, from the point of view of capitalist production, the
semblance of a special problem does indeed exist. In the present
case it is the capitalist who appears as the point of departure, who throws
money into circulation. The money which the labourer expends for the payment
of his means of subsistence existed previously as the money-form of the
variable capital and was therefore thrown originally into circulation by
the capitalist as a means of buying or paying for the labour-power. The
capitalist furthermore throws into circulation the money which constitutes
originally the money-form of his constant, fixed and circulating, capital;
he expends it as a means of purchase or payment for instruments of labour
and materials of production. But beyond this the capitalist no longer appears
as the starting-point of the quantity of money in circulation. Now, there
are only two points of departure: the capitalist and the labourer. All
third categories of persons must either receive money for their services
from these two classes or, to the extent that they receive it without any
services in return, they are joint owners of the surplus-value in the form
of rent, interest, etc. That the surplus-value does not all stay in the
pocket of the industrial capitalist but must be shared by him with other
persons, has nothing to do with the present question. The question is how
he turns his surplus-value into money, not how the proceeds are later divided.
For our purposes the capitalist may as well still be regarded as the sole
owner of the surplus-value. As for the labourer, it has already been said
that he is but the secondary, while the capitalist is the primary, starting-point
of the money thrown by the labourer into circulation. The money first advanced
as variable capital is going through its second circulation when the labourer
spends it to pay for means of subsistence.

The capitalist class remains consequently the sole point of departure
of the circulation of money. If they need &pound;400 for the payment of
means of production and &pound;100 for the payment of labour-power, they
throw &pound;500 into circulation. But the surplus-value incorporated in
the product, with a rate of surplus-value incorporated in the product,
with a rate of surplus-value of 100%, is equal in value to &pound;100.
How can they continually draw &pound;600 out of circulation, when they
continually throw only &pound;500 into it? Nothing comes from nothing.
The capitalist class as a whole cannot draw out of circulation what was
not previously thrown into it.

We disregard here the fact that the sum of &pound;400 may suffice,
when turned over ten times, to circulate means of production valued at
&pound;4,000 and labour-power valued at &pound;1,000, and that the other
&pound;100 may likewise suffice for the circulation of &pound;1,000 worth
of surplus-value. The ratio of the sum of money to the value of commodities
circulated by it is immaterial here. The problem remains the same. Unless
the same pieces of money circulate several times, a capital of &pound;5,000
must be thrown into circulation, and &pound;1,000 is required to convert
the surplus-value into money. The question is where this money comes from,
whether it is &pound;1,000 or &pound;100. In any event it is in excess
of the money-capital thrown into the circulation.

Indeed, paradoxical as it may appear at first sight, it is the
capitalist class itself that throws the money into circulation which serves
for the realisation of the surplus-value incorporated in the commodities.
But, nota bene, it does not throw it into circulation as advanced
money, hence not as capital. It spends it as a means of purchase for its
individual consumption. The money is not therefore advanced by the capitalist
class, although it is the point of departure of its circulation.

Let us take some individual capitalist who is starting in business,
a farmer for instance. During the first year, he advances a money-capital
of, say, &pound;5,000, paying &pound;4,000 for means of production, and
&pound;1,000 for labour-power. Let the rate of surplus-value be 100%, the
amount of surplus-value appropriated by him &pound;1,000. The above &pound;5,000
comprise all the money he advances as money-capital. But the man must also
live, and he does not take in any money until the end of the year. Take
it that his consumption amounts to &pound;1,000. These he must have in
his possession. He may say that he has to advance himself these &pound;1,000
during the first year. But this advance, which here has only a subjective
meaning, denotes nothing else but that he must pay for his individual consumption
during the first year out of his own pocket instead of defraying it out
of the gratuitous production of his labourers. He does not advance this
money as capital. He spends it, pays it out for an equivalent in means
of subsistence which he consumes. This value has been spent by him in money,
thrown into circulation and withdrawn from it in the form of commodity-values.
These commodity-values he has consumed. He has thus ceased to bear any
relation to their value. The money with which he paid for this value exists
now as an element of the circulating money. But he has withdrawn the value
of this money from circulation in the form of products; and this value
is now destroyed together with the products in which it existed. It's all
gone. But at the end of the year he throws commodities worth &pound;6,000
into circulation and sells them. By this means he recovers: 1) his advanced
money-capital of &pound;5,000; 2) the realised surplus-value of &pound;1,000.
He has advanced as capital, has thrown into circulation, &pound;5,000,
and he withdraws from it &pound;6,000 ; &pound;5,000 of which cover his
capital, and &pound;1,000 his surplus-value. The last &pound;1,000 are
turned into money with the money which he himself has thrown into circulation,
which he did not advance, but spent as a consumer, not as a capitalist.
They now return to him as the money-form of the surplus-value produced
by him. And henceforth this operation is repeated every year. But beginning
with the second year, the &pound;1,000 which he spends are constantly the
converted form, the money-form, of the surplus-value produced by him. He
spends them annually and they return to him annually.

If his capital were turned over more frequently a year, it would
not alter this state of affairs, but would affect the length of time, and
hence the amount which he would have to throw into circulation for his
individual consumption over and above his advanced money-capital.

This money is not thrown into circulation by the capitalist as
capital. But it is a decided trait of the capitalist to be able to live
on means in his possession until surplus-value begins to return.

In the present case we assumed that the sum of money which the
capitalist throws into circulation to pay for his individual consumption
until the first returns of his capital is exactly equal to the surplus-value
which he produced and hence must turn into money. This is obviously an
arbitrary assumption so far as the individual capitalist is concerned.
But it must be correct when applied to the entire capitalist class as simple
reproduction is assumed. It only expresses the same thing as the assumption;
namely, that the entire surplus-value, and it alone ; hence no fraction
of the original capital stock ; is consumed unproductively.

It had been previously assumed that the total production of precious
metals (taken to be equal to &pound;500) sufficed only for the replacement
of the wear and tear of the money.

The capitalists producing gold possess their entire product in
gold ; that portion which replaces constant capital as well as that which
replaces variable capital, and also that consisting of surplus-value. A
portion of the social surplus-value therefore consists of gold, and not
of a product which is turned into gold only in the process of circulation.
It consists from the outset of gold and is thrown into circulation in order
to draw products out of it. The same applies here to wages to variable
capital, and to the replacement of the advanced constant capital. Hence,
whereas one part of the capitalist class throws into circulation commodities
greater in value (greater by the amount of the surplus-value) than the
money-capital advanced by them, another part of the capitalists throws
into circulation money of greater value (greater by the amount of surplus-value)
than that of the commodities which they constantly withdraw from circulation
for the production of gold. Whereas one part of the capitalists constantly
pumps more money out of the circulation than it pours into it, the part
that produces gold constantly pumps more money into it than it takes out
in means of production.

Although a part of this product of &pound;500 in gold is surplus-value
of the gold-producers, the entire sum is, nonetheless, intended only to
replace the money necessary for the circulation of commodities. It is immaterial
for this purpose how much of this gold turns into money the surplus-value
incorporated in the commodities, and how much of it their other value constituents.

Transferring the production of gold from one country to another
produces no change whatever in the matter. One part of the social labour-power
and the social means of production of country A is converted into a product,
for instance linen, valued at &pound;500, which is exported to country
B in order to buy gold there. The productive capital thus employed in the
country A throws no more commodities ; as distinct from money ; upon
the market of country A than it would it if were employed directly in the
production of gold. This product of A represents &pound;500 in gold and
enters into the circulation of this country only as money. That portion
of the social surplus-value which is contained in this product exists for
country A directly in the form of money, and never in any other form. Although
for the gold-producing capitalists only a part of the product represents
surplus-value, and another part of the replacement capital, still the question
of how much of this gold, outside the circulating constant capital, replaces
variable capital and how much of it represents surplus-value depends exclusively
on the respective ratios of wages and surplus-value to the value of the
circulating commodities. The part which forms surplus-value is distributed
among the diverse members of the capitalist class. Although that part is
continually spent by them for individual consumption and recovered by the
sale of new products ; it is precisely this purchase and sale that circulates
among them the money required for the conversion of the surplus-value into
money ; there is nevertheless a portion of the social surplus-value, in
the form of money, even if in varying proportions, in the pockets of the
capitalists, just as a portion of the wages stays at least during part
of the week in the pockets of the labourers in the form of money. And this
part is not limited by that part of the money product which originally
forms the surplus-value of the gold-producing capitalists, but, as we have
said, is limited by the proportion in which the above product of &pound;500
is generally distributed between capitalists and labourers, and in which
the commodity-supply to be circulated consists of surplus-value and the
other constituents of value.

However, that portion of surplus-value which does not exist in
other commodities but alongside of them in the form of money, consists
of a portion of the annually produced gold only to the extent that a portion
of the annual production of gold circulates for the realisation of the
surplus-value. The other portion of money, which is continually in the
hands of the capitalist class in varying portions, as the money-form of
their surplus-value, is not an element of the annually produced gold, but
of the mass of money previously accumulated in the country.

According to our assumption the annual production of gold, &pound;500,
just covers the annual wear of money. If we keep in mind only these &pound;500
and ignore that portion of the annually produced mass of commodities which
is circulated by means of previously accumulated money, the surplus-value
produced in commodity-form will find in the circulation process money for
its conversion into money for the simple reason that on the other side
surplus-value is annually produced in the form of gold. The same applies
to the other parts of the gold product of &pound;500 which replace the
advanced money-capital.

Now, two things are to be noted here.

In the first place, it follows that the surplus-value spent by
the capitalists as money, as well as the variable and other productive
capital advanced by them in money, is actually the product of labourers,
namely of the labourers engaged in the production of gold. They produce
anew not only that portion of the gold product which is "advanced" to them as wages but also that portion of the gold product in which the surplus-value
of the capitalist gold-producers is directly represented. Finally, as for
that portion of the gold product which replaces only the constant capital-value
advanced for its production, it re-appears in the form of money (or product
in general) only through the annual work of the labourers. When the business
started, it was originally expended by the capitalist in the form of money,
which was not newly produced but formed a part of the circulating mass
of social money. But to the extent that it is replaced by a new product,
by additional gold, it is the annual product of the labourer. The advance
on the part of the capitalist appears here, too, merely as a form which
owes its existence to the fact that the labourer is neither the owner of
his own means of production nor able to command, during production, the
means of subsistence produced by other labourers.

In the second place however, as far as concerns that mass of money
which exists independently of his annual replacement of &pound;500, partly
in the form of a hoard and partly in the form of circulating money, things
must be, or rather must have been originally with it just as they are annually
with regard to these &pound;500. We shall return to this point at the close
of this sub-section. [See: pp. 347-48 of this book. ; Ed.] But
before then we wish to make a few additional remarks.

We have seen during our study of the turnover that, other circumstances
remaining equal, changes in the length of the periods of turnover require
changes in the amounts of money-capital, in order to carry on production
on the same scale. The elasticity of the money-circulation must therefore
be sufficient to adapt itself to this alternation of expansion and contraction.

If we furthermore assume other circumstances as remaining equal
; including the length, intensity, and productivity of the working-day
; but a different division of the value of the product between
wages and surplus-value, so that either the former rises and the latter
falls, or vice versa, the mass of the circulating money is not affected
thereby. This change can take place without any expansion or contraction
of the money currency. Let us consider particularly the case in which there
is a general rise in wages, so that, under the assumptions made, there
will be a general fall in the rate of surplus-value, but besides this,
also according to our assumption, there will be no change in the value
of the circulating mass of commodities. In this case there naturally is
an increase in the money-capital which must be advanced as variable capital,
hence in the amount of money which performs this function. But the surplus-value,
and therefore also the amount of money required for its realisation, decreases
by exactly the same amount by which the amount of money required for the
function of variable capital increases. The amount of money required for
the realisation of the commodity-value is not affected thereby, any more
than this commodity-value itself. The cost price of the commodity rises
for the individual capitalist but its social price of production remains
unchanged. What is changed is the proportion in which, apart from the constant
part of the value, the price of production of commodities is divided into
wages and profit.

But, it is argued, a greater outlay of variable money-capital
(the value of the money is, of course, considered constant) implies a larger
amount of money in the hands of the labourers. This causes a greater demand
for commodities on the part of the labourers. This, in turn, leads to a
rise in the price of commodities.; Or it is said: If wages rise, the
capitalists raise the prices of their commodities.; In either case, the
general rise in wages causes a rise in commodity prices. Hence a greater
amount of money is needed for the circulation of the commodities, no matter
how the rise in prices is explained.

Reply to the first formulation: in consequence of a rise in wages,
the demand of the labourers for the necessities of life will rise particularly.
Their demand for articles of luxury will increase to a lesser degree, or
a demand will develop for things which formerly did not come within the
scope of their consumption. The sudden and large-scale increase in the
demand for the indispensable means of subsistence will doubtless raise
their prices immediately. The consequence: a greater part of the social
capital will be employed in the production of necessities of life and a
smaller in the production of luxuries, since these fall in price on account
of the decrease in surplus-value and the consequent decrease in the demand
of the capitalists for these articles. On the other hand as the labourers
themselves buy articles of luxury, the rise in their wages does not promote
an increase in the prices of the necessities of life but simply displaces
buyers of luxuries. More luxuries than before are consumed by labourers,
and relatively fewer by capitalists. Voil� tout. After some
oscillations the value of the mass of circulating commodities is the same
as before. As for the momentary fluctuations, they will not have any other
effect than to throw unemployed money-capital into domestic circulation,
capital which hitherto sought employment in speculative deals on the stock-exchange
or in foreign countries.

Reply to the second formulation: If it were in the power of the
capitalist producers to raise the prices of their commodities at will,
they could and would do so without a rise in wages. Wages would never rise
if commodity prices fell. The capitalist class would never resist the trades' unions, if it could always and under all circumstances do what it is now doing by way of exception, under definite, special, so to say local, circumstances, to wit, avail itself of every rise in wages in order to raise prices of
commodities much higher yet and thus pocket greater profits.

The assertion that the capitalists can raise the prices of luxuries,
because the demand for them decreases (in consequence of the reduced demand
of the capitalists whose means of purchasing such articles has decreased)
would be a very unique application of the law of supply and demand. Since
it is not a mere displacement of luxury buyers, a displacement of capitalists
by labourers ; and so far as this displacement does occur, the demand
of the labourers does not stimulate a rise in the prices of necessities,
for the labourers cannot spend that portion of their increased wages for
necessities which they spend for luxuries ; the prices of luxuries fall
in consequence of reduced demand. Capital is therefore withdrawn from the
production of luxury articles, until their supply is reduced to dimensions
corresponding to their altered role in the process of social production.
With their production thus reduced, they rise in price ; their value otherwise
unchanged ; to their normal level. So long as this contraction, or this
process of levelling, lasts and the prices of necessities rise, as much
capital is supplied to the production of the latter as is withdrawn from
other branches of production, until the demand is satisfied. Then the equilibrium
is restored and the end of the whole process is that the social capital,
and therefore also the money-capital, is divided in a different proportion
between the production of the necessities of life and that of luxury articles.

The entire objection is a bugbear set up by the capitalists and
their economic sycophants.

The facts which serve as the pretext for this bugbear are of three
kinds:

1)
 It is a general law of money circulation that, other things
being equal, the quantity of money in circulation increases with a rise
in the sum of the prices of circulating commodities, irrespective of whether
this augmentation of the totality of prices applies to the same quantity
of commodities or to a greater quantity. The effect is then confused with
the cause. Wages rise (although the rise is rare, and proportional only
in exceptional cases) with the rising prices of the necessities of life.
Wage advances are the consequence, not the cause, of advances in the prices
of commodities.

2)
In the case of a partial, or local, rise of wages ; that is,
a rise only in some branches of production ; a local rise in the prices
of the products of these branches may follow. But even this depends on
many circumstances. For instance that wages were not abnormally depressed
and that therefore the rate of profit was not abnormally high; that the
market for these goods is not narrowed by the rise in prices (hence a contraction
of their supply previous to raising their prices is not necessary), etc.

3)
In the case of a general rise in wages the price of the produced
commodities rises in branches of industry where the variable capital preponderates,
but falls on the other hand in branches where the constant, or fixed, capital
preponderates.

We found in our study of the simple circulation of commodities (Buch
I, Kap. III, 2) [English edition: Ch. III. ; Ed.] that, though
the money-form of any definite quantity of commodities is only transient
within the sphere of circulation, still the money transiently in the hands
of one man during the metamorphosis of a certain commodity necessarily
passes into the hands of another, so that in the first instance commodities
are not only exchanged all-sidedly, or replace one another, but this replacement
is promoted and accompanied by an all-sided precipitation of money. "When
one commodity replaces another, the money-commodity always sticks to the
hands of some third person. Circulation sweats money from every pore."
(Buch I, S. 92.) [English edition: p. 113. ; Ed.] The same identical
fact is expressed, on the basis of the capitalist production of commodities,
by a portion of capital constantly existing in the form of money-capital,
and a portion of surplus-value constantly being found in the hands of its
owners, likewise in the form of money.

Apart from this, the circuit of money ; that is, the return of money to its point of departure ; being a phase of the turnover of capital, is a phenomenon entirely differently from, and even the opposite
of, the currency of money,[33] which expresses its steady departure from the starting-point by changing hands again and
again. (Buch I, S. 94.) [English edition: pp. 114-15. ; Ed.] Nevertheless, an accelerated turnover implies eo ipso an accelerated currency.

First concerning the variable capital: If a certain money-capital
of, say, &pound;500 is turned over the form of variable capital ten times
a year, it is evident that this aliquot part of the quantity of money in
circulation circulates ten times its value, or &pound;5,000. It circulates
ten times a year between the capitalist and the labourer. The labourer
is paid, and pays, ten times a year with the same aliquot part of the circulating
quantity of money. If the same variable capital were turned over only once
a year, the scale of production remaining the same, there would be only
one capital turnover of &pound;5,000.

Furthermore: Let the constant portion of the circulating capital
be equal to &pound;1,000. If the capital is turned over ten times, the
capitalist sells his commodity, and therefore also the constant circulating
portion of its value, ten times a year. The same aliquot part of the circulating
quantity of money (equal to &pound;1,000) passes ten times per annum from
the hands of its owners into those of the capitalist. This money changes
hands ten times. Secondly, the capitalist buys means of production ten
times a year. This again makes ten circulations of money from one hand
into another. With a sum of money amounting to &pound;1,000, the industrial
capitalist sells &pound;10,000 worth of commodities, and again buys &pound;10,000
worth of commodities. By means of 20 circulations of &pound;1,000 in money
a commodity-supply of &pound;20,000 is circulated.

Finally, with an acceleration of the turnover, the portion of
money with realises the surplus-value also circulates faster.

But, conversely, an acceleration of money-circulation does not
necessarily imply a more rapid turnover of capital, and therefore of money;
that is, it does not necessarily imply a contraction and more rapid renewal
of the reproduction process.

A more rapid circulation of money takes place whenever a larger
number of transactions are performed with the same amount of money. This
may also take place under the same periods of capital reproduction as a
result of changes in the technical facilities for the circulation of money.
Furthermore, there may be an increase in the number of transactions in
which money circulates without representing actual exchanges of commodities
(marginal transactions on the stock-exchange, etc.). On the other hand
some circulations of money may be entirely eliminated, as for instance
where the agriculturist is himself a landowner, there is no circulation
of money between the farmer and the landlord; where the industrial capitalist
is himself the owner of the capital, there is no circulation of money between
him and the creditors.

As for the primitive formation of a money-hoard in a country, and its
appropriation by a few, it is unnecessary to discuss it in detail at this
point.

The capitalist mode of production ; its basis being wage-labour,
the payment of the labourer in money, and in general the transformation
of payments in kind into money payments ; can assume greater dimensions
and achieve greater perfection only where there is available in the country
a quantity of money sufficient for circulation and the formation of a hoard
(reserve fund, etc.) promoted by it. This is the historical premise, although
it is not to be taken to mean that first a sufficient hoard is formed and
then capitalist production begins. It develops simultaneously with the
development of the conditions necessary for it, and one of these conditions
is a sufficient supply of precious metals. Hence the increased supply of
precious metals since the sixteenth century is an essential element in
the history of the development of capitalist production. But so far as
the necessary further supply of money material on the basis of capitalist
production is concerned, we see surplus-value incorporated in products
thrown into circulation without the money required for their conversion
into money, on the one hand, and on the other surplus-value in the form
of gold without previous transformation of products into money.

The additional commodities to be converted into money find the
necessary amount of money at hand, because on the other side additional
gold (and silver) intended for conversion into commodities is thrown into
circulation, not by means of exchange, but by production itself.