3. Replacement of IIc in Accumulation

In the exchange of I(v + s) for IIc we thus meet with various cases. In simple reproduction both of them must be equal and replace one
another, since otherwise simple reproduction cannot proceed without
disturbance, as we have seen above.

In accumulation it is above all the rate of accumulation that must be
considered. In the preceding cases we assumed that the rate of
accumulation in I was equal to &frac12;s I, and also that it remained constant
from year to year. We changed only the proportion in which this
accumulated capital was divided into variable and constant capital. We
then had three cases:

1) I(v + &frac12;s) equals IIc, which is therefore smaller than I(v + s). This must always be so, otherwise I does not accumulate.

2) I(v + &frac12;s) is greater than IIc. In this case the replacement is effected by adding a corresponding portion of IIs to IIc, so that this sum becomes equal to I(v + &frac12;s). Here the replacement for II is not a simple reproduction of its constant capital, but accumulation, an augmentation of its constant capital by that portion of its surplus-product which it exchanges for means of production of I. This augmentation implies at the same time a corresponding addition to variable capital II out of its own
surplus-product.

3) I(v + &frac12;s) is smaller than IIc. In this case II does not fully reproduce its constant capital by means of exchange and must make good the
deficit by purchase from I. But this does not entail any further
accumulation of variable capital II, since its constant capital is fully
reproduced only by this operation. On the other hand that part of
capitalists I who accumulate only additional money-capital, have already
accomplished a portion of this accumulation by this transaction.

The premise of simple reproduction, that I(v + s) is equal to IIc, is not only incompatible with capitalist production, although this does not exclude the possibility that in an industrial cycle of 10-11 years some
year may show a smaller total production than the preceding year, so
that not even simple reproduction takes place compared to the preceding
year. Besides that, considering the natural annual increase in population
simple reproduction could take place only to the extent that a
correspondingly larger number of unproductive servants would partake of
the 1,500 representing the aggregate surplus-value. But accumulation of
capital, real capitalist production, would be impossible under such
circumstances. The fact of capitalist accumulation therefore excludes the
possibility of IIc being equal to I(v + s). Nevertheless it might occur even with capitalist accumulation that in consequence of the course taken by
the processes of accumulation during a preceding series of periods of
production IIc might become not only equal but even bigger than I(v + s). This would mean an over-production in II and could not be adjusted in
any other way than by a great crash, in consequence of which some
capital of II would get transferred to I.

Nor does it alter the relation of I(v + s) to IIc if a portion of constant capital II reproduces itself, as happens for instance in the use of home-grown
seeds in agriculture. This portion of IIc is no more to be taken into
consideration in the exchange between I and II than is Ic. Nor does it
change matters if a part of the products of II is capable of entering into I
as means of production. It is covered by a part of the means of
production supplied by I, and this portion must be deducted on both
sides at the outset, if we wish to examine in pure and unobscured form
the exchange between the two large classes of social production, the
producers of means of production and the producers of articles of
consumption.

Hence under capitalist production I(v + s) cannot be equal to IIc, in other words, the two cannot balance in mutual exchange. On the other
hand, if I(s/x) is taken as that portion of Is which is spent by capitalists I as revenue, I(v + s/x) may be equal to, larger, or smaller than, IIc. But I(v + s/x) must always be smaller than II(c + s) by as much as that portion of IIs which must be consumed under all circumstances by capitalist class II.

It must be noted that in this exposition of accumulation the value of the constant capital is not presented accurately so far as that capital is a part of the value of the commodity-capital it helped to produce. The
fixed portion of the newly accumulated constant capital enters into the
commodity-capital only gradually and periodically, according to the
different natures of these fixed elements. Therefore whenever raw
materials, semi-finished goods, etc., enter in huge quantities into the
production of commodities, the commodity-capital consists for the most
part of replacements of the circulating constant components and of the
variable capital. (On account of the specific turnover of the circulating
component parts this way of presenting the matter may nevertheless be
adopted. It is then assumed that the circulating portion together with the
portion of value of the fixed capital transferred to it is turned over so
often during the year that the aggregate sum of the commodities
supplied is equal in value to all the capital entering into the annual
production.) But wherever only auxiliary materials are used for
mechanical industry, and no raw material, there the labour element,
equal to v, must reappear in the commodity-capital as its larger
constituent. While in the calculation of the rate of profit the surplus-value
is figured on the total capital, regardless of whether the fixed
components periodically transfer much or little value to the product, the
fixed portion of constant capital is to be included in the calculation of the
value of any periodically created commodity-capital only to the extent
that on an average it yields value to the product on account of wear and
tear.