The Meeting of Demand and Supply

The capitalist throws less value in the form of money into the circulation
than he draws out of it, because he throws into it more value in the form
of commodities than he withdrew from it in the form of commodities. Since
he functions simply as a personification of capital, as an industrial capitalist,
his supply of commodity-value is always greater than his demand for it.
If his supply and demand in this respect covered each other it would mean
that his capital had not produced any surplus-value, that it had not functioned
as productive capital, that the productive capital had been converted into
commodity-capital not big with surplus-value; that it had not drawn any
surplus-value in commodity form out of labour-power during the process
of production, had not functioned at all as capital. The capitalist must
indeed "sell dearer than he has bought, " but he succeeds in doing so only
because the capitalist process of production enables him to transform the
cheaper commodity he bought ; cheaper because it contains less value ; 
into a commodity of greater value, hence a dearer one. He sells dearer,
not because he sells above the value of his commodity, but because his
commodity contains value in excess of that contained in the ingredients
of its production.

The rate at which the capitalist makes the value of his capital
expand is the greater, the greater the difference between his supply and
his demand, i.e., the greater the excess of the commodity-value he supplies
over the commodity-value he demands. His aim is not to equalize his supply
and demand, but to make the inequality between them, the excess of his
supply over his demand, as great as possible.

What is true of the individual capitalist applies to the capitalist
class.

In so far as the capitalist merely personifies industrial capital,
his own demand is confined to means of production and labour-power. In
point of value, his demand for MP is smaller than his advanced capital;
he buys means of production of a smaller value than that of his capital,
and therefore of a still smaller value than that of the commodity-capital
which he supplies.

As regards his demand for labour-power, it is determined in point
of value by the relation of his variable capital to his total capital,
hence equals v : C. In capitalist production this demand thereby grows smaller
than his demand for means of production. His purchases of MP steadily rise
above his purchases of L.

Since the labourer generally converts his wages into means of
subsistence, and for the overwhelmingly larger part into absolute necessities,
the demand of the capitalist for labour-power is indirectly also a demand
for the articles of consumption essential to the working-class. But this
demand is equal to v and not one iota greater (if the labourer saves a
part of his wages ; we necessarily discard here all credit relations ; 
he converts part of his wages into a hoard and to that extent does not
act as a bidder, a purchaser). The upper limit of a capitalist's demand
is C, equal to c + v, but his supply is equal to c + v + s. Consequently
if the composition of his commodity-capital is 80c + 20v
+ 20s, his demand is equal to 80c + 20v, hence, considered from the angle of the value it contains, one-fifth smaller than his supply. The greater the percentage of the mass of surplus-value produced by him
(his rate of profit) the smaller becomes his demand in relation to his
supply. Although with the further development of production the demand
of the capitalist for labour-power, and thus indirectly for necessary means
of subsistence, steadily decreases compared with his demand for means of
production, it must not be forgotten on the other hand that his demand
for MP is always smaller than his capital. His demand for means of production
must therefore always be smaller in value than the commodity-product of
the capitalist who, working with a capital of equal value and under equal
conditions, furnishes him with those means of production. That many capitalists
and not only one do the furnishing does not alter the case. Take it that
his capital is &pound;1,000, and its constant part &pound;800; then his
demand on all these capitalists is equal to &pound;800. Together they supply
means of production worth &pound;1,200 for each &pound;1,000 (regardless
of what share in each &pound;1,000 may fall to each one of them and of
the fraction of his total capital which the share of each may represent),
assuming that the rate of profit is the same. Consequently his demand covers
only two-thirds of their supply, while his own total demand amounts to
only four-fifths of his own supply, measured in value.

It still remains for us, incidentally, to investigate the problem
of turnover. Let the total capital of the capitalist be &pound;5,000, of
which &pound;4,000 is fixed and &pound;1,000 circulating capital; let this
1,000 be composed of 800c plus 200v, as assumed above.
His circulating capital must be turned over five times a year for his total
capital to turn over once. His commodity-product is then equal to &pound;6,000,
i.e., &pound;1,000 more than his advanced capital, which results in the
same ratio of surplus-value as above:

5,000 C : 1,000(c + v) : 20s

This turnover therefore does not change anything in the ratio of his total
demand to his total supply. The former remains one-fifth smaller than the
latter.

Suppose his fixed capital has to be renewed in 10 years. So the
capitalist pays every year one-tenth, or &pound;400, into a sinking fund
and thus has only a value of &pound;3,600 of fixed capital left plus &pound;400
in money. If the repairs are necessary and do not exceed the average, they
represent nothing but capital invested later. We may look at the matter
the same as if he had allowed for the cost of repairs beforehand, when
calculating the value of his investment capital, so far as this enters
into the annual commodity-product, so that it is included in the one-tenth
sinking fund payment. (If his need for repairs is below average he is so
much money to the good, and the reverse if above. But this evens out for
the entire class of capitalists engaged in the same branch of industry.)
At any rate, although his annual demand still remains &pound;5,000, equal
to the original capital-value he advanced (assuming his total capital is
turned over once a year), this demand increases with regard to the circulating
part of the capital, while it steadily decreases with regard to its fixed
part.

We now come to reproduction. Let us assume that the capitalist
consumes the entire surplus-value m and reconverts only capital C of the
original magnitude into productive capital. Then the demand of the capitalist
is equal in value to his supply; but this does not refer to the movement
of his capital. As a capitalist he exercises a demand for only four-fifths
of his supply (in terms of value). He consumes one-fifth as a non-capitalist,
not in his function as capitalist but for his private requirements or pleasures.

His calculation, expressed in percentages, is then
as follows:

Demand as capitalist . . . . . . . . . . . 100, supply 120

Demand as man about town . . . . . . . 20, supply ; 

 _________________________________________

Total demand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120, supply 120

This assumption is tantamount to assuming that capitalist production
does not exist, and therefore that the industrial capitalist himself does
not exist. For capitalism is abolished root and branch by the bare assumption
that it is personal consumption and not enrichment that works as the compelling
motive.

But such an assumption is impossible also technically. The capitalist
must not only form a reserve capital to cushion price fluctuations and
enable him to wait for favorable buying and selling conditions. He must
accumulate capital in order to extend his production and build technical
progress into his productive organism.

In order to accumulate capital he must first withdraw in money-form
from circulation a part of the surplus-value which he obtained from that
circulation, and must hoard it until it has increased sufficiently for
the extension of his old business or the opening of a side-line. So long
as the formation of the hoard continues, it does not increase the demand
of the capitalist. The money is immobilised. It does not withdraw from
the commodity-market any equivalent in commodities for the money equivalent
withdrawn from it for commodities supplied.

Credit is not considered here. And credit includes for example
deposits by the capitalist of accumulating money in a bank on current account
paying interest.

Notes

7. End of Manuscript V. What follows to the end of the chapter, is a note contained in a notebook of 1877 or 1878 amid extracts from various books. ; F.E.