Capital Volume II

Part I: The Metamorphoses of Capital and their Circuits

Chapter 1: The Circuit of Money Capital

The circular movement [1] of capital takes place in three
stages, which, according to the presentation in Volume I, form the following
series:

First stage: The capitalist appears as a buyer on the commodity- and the labour-market; his money is transformed into commodities, or
it goes through the circulation act M ; C.

Second Stage: Productive consumption of the purchased commodities by the capitalist. He acts as a capitalist producer of commodities; his
capital passes through the process of production. The result is a commodity
of more value than that of the elements entering into its production.

Third Stage: The capitalist returns to the market as a
seller; his commodities are turned into money; or they pass through the
circulation act C ; M.

Hence the formula for the circuit of money-capital is: M ; C ...
P ... C' ; M', the dots indicating that the process of circulation is interrupted,
and C' and M' designating C and M increased by surplus-value.

The first and third stages were discussed in Book I only in so
far as this was necessary for the understanding of the second stage, the
process of production of capital. For this reason, the various forms which
capital takes on in its different stages, and which now assumes and now
strips off in the repetition of its circuit, were not considered. These
forms are now the direct object of our study.

In order to conceive these forms in their pure state, one must
first of all discard all factors which have nothing to do with the changing
or building of forms as such. It is therefore taken for granted here not
only that the commodities are sold at their values but also that this takes
place under the same conditions throughout. Likewise disregarded therefore
are any changes of value which might occur during the movement in circuits.

I. First Stage. M ; C [2]

M ; C represents the conversion of a sum of money into a sum of commodities;
the purchaser transforms his money into commodities, the sellers transform
their commodities into money. What renders this act of the general circulation
of commodities simultaneously a functionally definite section in independent
circuit of some individual capital is primarily not the form of the act
but its material content, the specific use-character of the commodities
which change places with the money. These commodities are on the one hand
means of production, on the other labour-power, material and personal factors
in the production of commodities whose specific nature must of course correspond
to the special kind of articles to be manufactured. If we call labour-power
L, and the means of production MP, then the sum of commodities to be bought,
C, is equal to L + MP, or more briefly C M, and M' - M = s, the
surplus-value. But as a result of this circular movement M ... M' it is
only M' which exists now; it is the product in which its process of formation
has become extinct. M' now exists by itself, independently of the movement
which brought it into existence. That movement is gone; M' is there in
its place.

But M', being M plus m, &pound;500, composed of &pound;422 advanced
capital plus an increment of the same amounting to &pound;78, represents
at the same time a qualitative relation, although this qualitative relation
itself exists only as a relation between the parts of one and the same
sum, hence as a quantitative relation. M, the advanced capital, which is
now once more present in its original form (&pound;422), exists as realised
capital. It has not only preserved itself but also realised itself as capital
by being distinguished as such from m (&pound;78), to which it stands in
the same relation as to an increase of its own, to a fruit of
its own, to an increment to which it has given birth itself. It has
been realised as capital because it has been realised as a value which
has created value. M' exists as a capital-relation. M no longer appears
as mere money, but expressly plays the part of money-capital, expressed
as a self-expanded value, hence possessing the property of self-expansion,
of hatching a higher value than it itself has. M became capital by virtue
of its relation to the other part of M', which it has brought about, which
has been effected by it as the cause, which is the consequence of it as
the ground. Thus M' appears as the sum of values differentiated within
itself, functionally (conceptually) distinguished within itself, expressing
the capital-relation.

But this is expressed only as a result, without the intervention
of the process of which it is the result.

Parts of value as such are not qualitatively different from one
another, except in so far as they appear as values of different articles,
of concrete things, hence in various use-forms and therefore as values
of different commodities ; a difference which does not originate with
them themselves as mere parts of value. In money all differences between
commodities are extinguished, because it is the equivalent form common
to all of them. A sum of money in the amount of &pound;500 consists solely
of uniform elements of &pound;1 each. Since the intermediate links of its
origin are obliterated in the simple existence of this sum of money and
every trace has been lost of the specific difference between the different
component parts of capital in the process of production, there exists now
only the distinction between the conceptual form of a principal equal to &pound;422, the capital advanced, and an excess value of &pound;78. Let
M' be equal to, say, &pound;110, of which &pound;100 may be equal to M,
the principal, and 10 equal to s, the surplus-value. There is an absolute
homogeneity, an absence of conceptual distinctions, between the two constituent
parts of the sum of &pound;110. Any &pound;10 of this sum always constitute
1/11 of the total sum of &pound;1/10, whether they are 1/10 of the advanced
principal of &pound;100 or the excess of &pound;10 above it. Principal
and excess sum, capital and surplus-sum, may therefore be expressed as
fractional parts of the total sum. In our illustration, 10/11 form the
principal, or the capital, and 1/11 the surplus sum. In its money-expression
realised capital appears therefore at the end of its process as an irrational
expression of the capital-relation.

True, this applies also to C' (C plus c). But there is this difference:
that C', of which C and c are only proportional value-parts of the same
homogeneous mass of commodities, indicates its origin P, whose immediate
product it is, while in M', a form derived directly from circulation, the
direct relation to P is obliterated.

The irrational distinction between the principal and the incremental
sum, which is contained in M', so far as that expresses the result of the
movement M ... M', disappears as soon as it once more functions actively
as money-capital and is therefore not fixed as a money-expression of expanded
industrial capital. The circuit of capital can never begin with M' (although
M' now performs the function of M). It can begin only with M, that is to
say it can never begin as an expression of the capital-relation, but only
as a form of advance of capital-value. As soon as the &pound;500 are once
more advanced as capital, in order again to produce s, they constitute
a point of departure, not one of return. Instead of a capital of &pound;422,
a capital of &pound;500 is now advanced. It is more money than before,
more capital-value, but the relation between its two constituent parts
has disappeared. In fact a sum of &pound;500 instead of the &pound;422
might originally have served as capital.

It is not an active function of money-capital to appear as M';
to appear as M' is rather a function of C'. Even in the simple circulation
of commodities, first in C1 ; M, secondly in M ; C2, money M does not figure actively until the second act, M ; C2. Its appearance in the form of M is only the result of the first act, by virtue of which it only then appears as a converted form of C1. True, the capital-relation contained in M', the relation of one of its
parts as the capital-value to the other as its value increment, acquires
functional importance in so far as, with the constantly repeated circuit
M ... M', M' splits into two circulations, one of them a circulation of
capital, the other of surplus-value. Consequently these two parts perform
not only quantitatively but also qualitatively different functions, M others
than m. But considered by itself, the form M ... M' does not include what
the capitalist consumes, but explicitly only the self-expansion and accumulation,
so far as the latter expresses itself above all as a periodical augmentation
of ever renewed advances of money-capital.

Although M', equal to M plus m, is the irrational form of capital,
it is at the same time only money-capital in its realised form, in the
form of money which has generated money. But this is different from the
function of money-capital in the first stage, 
M ; C<LMP.
In the first stage, M circulates as money. It assumes the functions of
money-capital because only in its money state can it perform a money-function,
can it transform itself into the elements of P, into L and MP, which stand
opposed to it as commodities. In this circulation act it functions only
as money. But as this act is the first stage of capital-value in process,
it is simultaneously a function of money-capital, by virtue of the specific
use-form of the commodities L and MP which are bought. M' on the other
hand, composed of M, the capital-value, and m, the surplus-value begotten
of M, stands for self-expanded capital-value ; the purpose and the outcome,
the function of the total circuit of capital. The fact that it expresses
this outcome in the form of money, as realised money-capital, does not
derive from its being the money-form of capital, money-capital,
but on the contrary from its being money-capital, capital in the
form of money, from capital having opened the process in this form, from
its having been advanced in the money-form. Its reconversion into the money-form
is, as we have seen, a function of commodity-capital C', not of money-capital.
As for the difference between M and M', it (m) is simply the money-form
of c, the increment of C. M' is composed of M plus m only because C' was
composed of C plus c. In C' therefore this difference and the relation
of the capital-value to the surplus-value generated by it is present and
expressed before both of them are transformed into M', into a sum of money
in which both parts of the value come face to face with each other independently
and may, therefore, be employed in separate and distinct functions.

M' is only the result of the realisation of C'. Both M' and C'
are merely different forms of self-expanded capital-value, one of them
the commodity-form, the other the money-form. Both of them have this in
common: that they are self-expanded capital-value. Both of them are materialised
capital, because capital-value as such exists here together with the surplus-value,
the fruit obtained through it and differing from it, although this relation
is expressed only in the irrational form of the relation between two parts
of a sum of money or of a commodity-value. But as expressions of capital
in relation and contradistinction to the surplus-value produced by it,
hence as expressions of self-expanded value, M' and C' are the same and
express the same thing, only in different forms. They do not differ as
money-capital and commodity-capital but as money and commodities. In so
far as they represent self-expanded value, capital acting as capital, they
only express the result of the functioning of productive capital, the only
function in which capital-value generates value. What they have in common
is that both of them, money-capital as well as commodity-capital, are modes
of existence of capital. The one is capital in money-form, the other in
commodity-form. The specific functions that distinguish them cannot therefore
be anything else but differences between the functions of money and of
commodities. Commodity-capital, the direct product of the capitalist process
of production, is reminiscent of its origin and is therefore more rational
and less incomprehensible in form than money-capital, in which every trace
of this process has vanished, as in general all special use-forms of commodities
disappear in money. It is therefore only when M' itself functions as commodity-capital,
when it is the direct product of a productive process instead of being
the converted form of this product, that it loses its bizarre form, that
is to say, in the production of the money material itself. In the production
of gold for instance the formula would be M ; C<LMP ... P ... M' (M plus m), where M' would figure as a commodity product, because P furnishes more gold than was advanced for the elements of production of the gold in the first M, the money-capital. In this case the irrational
nature of the expression M ... M' (M plus m) disappears. Here a part of
a sum of money appears as the mother of another part of the same sum of money.

IV. The Circuit as a Whole

We have seen that the process of circulation is interrupted at the end
of its first phase, M ; C<LMP, by P, in which the commodities L and MP bought in the market are consumed as the material and value components of productive capital. The product of this consumption is a new commodity, C', altered in respect of substance and value. The
interrupted process of circulation, M ; C, must be completed by C ; M.
But the bearer of this second and concluding phase of circulation is C',
a commodity different in substance and value from the original C. The circulation
series therefore appears as 1) M ; C1; 2) C'2 ; M', where in the second phase of the first commodity, C1, another commodity of greater value and different use-form, C'2, is substituted during the interruption caused by the functioning of P, the production of C' from the elements of C, the forms of existence of productive
capital P. However, the first form of appearance in which capital faced
us (Buch. I, Kap. IV, 1), [English edition: Ch. IV. ; Ed.] viz.,
M ; C ; M' (extended: 1) M ; C1; 2) C1 ; M') shows the same commodity twice. Both times it is the same commodity into which money is transformed in the first phase and reconverted into more money in the second phase. In spite of this essential difference, both circulations
share this much: that in their first phase money is transformed into commodities,
and in the second commodities into money, that the money spent in the first
phase returns in the second. On the one hand both have in common this reflux
of the money to its starting-point, on the other hand also the excess of
the returning money over the money advanced. To that extent the formula
M ; C ... C' ; M' is contained in the general formula M ; C ; M'.

It follows furthermore that each time equally great quantities
of simultaneously existing values face and replace each other in the two
metamorphoses M ; C and C' ; M' belonging in circulation. The change in
value pertains exclusively to the metamorphosis P, the process of production,
which thus appears as a real metamorphosis of capital, as compared with
the merely metamorphosis of circulation.

Let us now consider the total movement, M ; C ... P ... C' ; M',
or, M ; C<LMP
 ... P ... C' (C + c) ; M' (M + m), its more expanded form. Capital here appears as a value which goes through a series of interconnected, interdependent transformations, a series of metamorphoses which form just as many phases, or stages, of the process
as a whole. Two of these phases belong in the sphere of circulation, one
of them in that of production. In each one of these phases capital-value
has a different form for which there is a correspondingly different, special
function. Within this movement the advanced value does not only preserve
itself but grows, increases in magnitude. Finally, in the concluding stage,
it returns to the same form which it had at the beginning of the process
as a whole. This process as a whole constitutes therefore the process of
moving in circuits.

The two forms assumed by capital-value at the various stages of
its circulation are those of money-capital and commodity-capital. The form pertaining to the stage of production is that of productive
capital. The capital which assumes these forms in the course of its
total circuit and then discards them and in each of them performs the function
corresponding to the particular form, is industrial capital, industrial
here in the sense it comprises every branch of industry run on a capitalist
basis.

Money-capital, commodity-capital and productive capital, do not
therefore designate independent kinds of capital whose functions form the
content of likewise independent branches of industry separated from one
another. They denote here only special functional forms of industrial capital,
which assumes all three of them one after the other.

Capital describes its circuit normally only so long as its various
phases pass uninterruptedly into one another. If capital stops short in
the first phase M ; C, money-capital assumes the rigid form of a hoard;
if it stops in the phase of production, the means of production lie without
functioning on the one side, while labour-power remains unemployed on the
other; and if capital stops short in the last phase C' ; M', piles of unsold
commodities accumulate and clog the flow of circulation.

However, it is in the nature of things that the circuit itself
necessitates the fixation of capital for certain lengths of time in its
various phases. In each of its phases industrial capital is tied up with
a definite form: money-capital, productive capital, commodity-capital.
It does not acquire the form in which it may enter a new transformation
phase until it has performed the function corresponding to each particular
form. To make this plain, we have assumed in our illustration that the
capital-value of the quantity of commodities created at the stage of production
is equal to the total sum of the value originally advanced in the form
of money; or, in other words, that the entire capital-value advanced in
the form of money passes on in bulk from one stage to the next. But we have
seen (Buch I, Kap. VI) [English edition: Ch. VIII. ; Ed.] that
a part of constant capital, the labour instruments proper (e.g., machinery),
continually serve anew, with more or less numerous repetitions of the same
process of production, hence transfer their values piecemeal to the products.
It will be seen later to what extent this circumstance modifies the circular
movement of capital. For the present the following suffices: In our illustration
the value of productive capital amounting to &pound;422 contained only
the average wear and tear of factory buildings, machinery, etc., that is
to say only that part of value which they transferred to the yarn in the
transformation of 10,600 lbs. of cotton into 10,000 lbs. of yarn, which
represented the product of one week's spinning of 60 hours. In the means
of production, into which the advanced constant capital of &pound;372 was
transformed, the instruments of labour, buildings, machinery, etc., figured
as if they had only been rented in the market at a weekly rate. But this
does not change the gist of the matter in any way. We have but to multiply
the quantity of yarn produced in one week, i.e., 10,000 lbs. of yarn, by
the number of weeks contained in a certain number of years, in order to
transfer to the yarn the entire value of the instruments of labour bought
and consumed during this period. It is then plain that the advanced money-capital
must first be transformed into these instruments, hence must have gone
through the first phase M ; C before it can function as productive capital
P. And it is likewise plain in our illustration that the capital value
of &pound;422, embodied in the yarn during the process of production, cannot
be part of the value of the 10,000 lbs. of yarn and enter the circulation
phase C' ; M' until it is ready. It cannot be sold until it has been spun.

In the general formula the product P is regarded as a material
thing different from the elements of the productive capital, as an object
existing apart from the process of production and having a use-form different
from that of the elements of production. This is always the case when the
result of the productive process assumes the form of a thing, even when
a part of the product re-enters the resumed production as one of its elements.
Grain for instance serves as seed for its own production, but the product
consists only of grain and hence has a shape different from those of related
elements such as labour-power, implements, fertiliser. But there are certain
independent branches of industry in which the product of the productive
process is not a new material product, is not a commodity. Among these
only the communications industry, whether engaged in transportation proper,
of goods and passengers, or in the mere transmission of communications,
letters, telegrams, etc., is economically important.

A. Chuprov [6] says on this score:

"The manufacturer
may first produce articles and then look for consumers"

[his product, thrust out of the process of production when finished, passes into circulation as a commodity separated from it].

"Production and consumption thus appear
as two acts separated in space and time. In the transportation industry,
which does not create any new products but merely transfer men and things,
these two acts coincide; its services" [change of place] "are consumed
the moment they are produced. For this reason the area within which railways
can sell their services extends at best 50 versts (53 kilometres) on either
side of their tracks."

The result, whether men or goods are transported, is a change
in their whereabouts. Yarn, for instance, may now be in India instead of
in England, where it was produced.

However, what the transportation industry sells is change of location.
The useful effect is inseparably connected with the process of transportation,
i.e., the productive process of the transport industry. Men and goods travel
together with the means of transportation, and their traveling, this locomotion,
constitutes the process of production effected by these means. The useful
effect can be consumed only during this process of production. It does
not exist as a utility different from this process, a use-thing which does
not function as an article of commerce, does not circulate as a commodity,
until after it has been produced. But the exchange-value of this useful
effect is determined, like that of any other commodity, by the value of
the elements of production (labour-power and means of production) consumed
in it plus the surplus-value created by the surplus-labour of the labourers
employed in transportation. This useful effect also entertains the very
same relations to consumption that other commodities do. If it is consumed
individually its value disappears during its consumption; if it is consumed
productively so as to constitute by itself a stage in the production of
the commodities being transported, its value is transferred as an additional
value to the commodity itself. The formula for the transport industry would
therefore be M ; C<LMP
 ... P ; M', since it is the process of production itself that is paid for and consumed, not a product separate and distinct from it. Hence this formula has almost the same form
as that of the production of precious metals, the only difference being
that in this case M' represents the converted form of the useful effect
created during the process of production, and not the bodily form of the
gold or silver produced in this process and extruded from it.

Industrial capital is the only mode of existence of capital in
which not only the appropriation of surplus-value, or surplus-product,
but simultaneously its creation is a function of capital. Therefore with
it the capitalist character of production is a necessity. Its existence
implies the class antagonism between capitalists and wage-labourers. To
the extent that it seizes control of social production, the technique and
social organisation of the labour-process are revolutionised and with them
the economico-historical type of society. The other kinds of capital, which
appeared before industrial capital amid conditions of social production
that have receded into the past or are now succumbing, are not only subordinated
to it and the mechanism of their functions altered in conformity with it,
but move solely with it as their basis, hence live and die, stand and fall
with this basis. Money-capital and commodity-capital, so far as they function
as vehicles of particular branches of business, side by side with industrial
capital, are nothing but modes of existence of the different functional
forms now assumed, now discarded by industrial capital in the sphere of
circulation ; modes which, due to social division of labour, have attained
independent existence and been developed one-sidedly.

The circuit M ... M' on the one hand intermingles with the general
circulation of commodities, proceeds from it and flows back into it, is
a part of it. On the other hand it forms an independent movement of the
capital-value for the individual capitalist, a movement of its own which
takes place partly within the general circulation of commodities, partly
outside of it, but which always preserves its independent character. First,
because its two phases that take place in the sphere of circulation, M ; C
and C' ; M', being phases of the movement of capital, have functionally
definite characters. In M ; C, C is materially determined as labour-power
and means of production; in C' ; M' the capital-value is realised plus
the surplus-value. Secondly, because P, the process of production, embraces
productive consumption. Thirdly, because the return of the money to its
starting-point makes of the movement M ... M' a circuit complete in itself.

Every individual capital is therefore, on the one hand, in its
two circulation-halves M ; C and C' ; M', an agent of the general circulation
of commodities, in which it either functions or lies concatenated as money
or as a commodity, thus forming a link in the general chain of metamorphoses
taking place in the world of commodities. On the other hand it describes
within the general circulation its own independent circuit in which the
sphere of production forms a transitional stage and in which this capital
returns to its starting-point in the same form in which it left that point.
Within its own circuit, which includes its real metamorphosis in the process
of production, it changes at the same time the magnitude of its value.
It returns not simply as money-value, but as augmented, increased money-value.

Let us finally consider M ; C ... P ... C' ; M' as a special form
of the circular course of capital, alongside the other forms which we shall
analyse later. We shall find that it is distinguished by the following
features:

1. It appears as the circuit of money-capital, because
industrial capital in its money-form, as money-capital, forms the
starting-point and the point of return of its total process. The formula
itself expresses the fact that the money is not expended here as money
but is merely advanced, hence is merely the money-form of capital, money-capital.
It expresses furthermore that exchange-value, not use-value, is the determining
aim of this movement. Just because the money-form of value is the independent,
tangible form in which value appears, the form of circulation M ... M',
the initial and terminal points of which are real money, expresses most
graphically the compelling motive of capitalist production ; money-making.
The process of production appears merely as an unavoidable intermediate
link, as a necessary evil for the sake of money-making. All nations with
a capitalist mode of production are therefore seized periodically by a
feverish attempt to make money without the intervention of the process
of production.

2. The stage of production, the function of P, represents in this
circuit an interruption between the two phases of circulation M ; C ...
C' ; M', which in its turn represents only the intermediate link in the
simple circulation M ; C ; M'. The process of production appears in the
form of a circuit-describing process, formally and explicitly as that which
it is in the capitalist mode of production, as a mere means of expanding
the advanced value, hence enrichment as such as the purpose of production.

3. Since the series of phases is opened by M ; C, the second link
of the circulation is C' ; M'. In other words, the starting-point is M,
the money-capital that is to be self-expanded; the terminal point is M',
the self-expanded money-capital M plus m, in which M figures as realised
capital along with its offspring m. This distinguishes the circuit of M
from that of the two other circuits P and C', and does so in two ways.
On the one hand by the money-form of the two extremes. And money is the
independent, tangible form of existence of value, the value of the product
in its independent value-form, in which every trace of the use-value of
the commodities has been extinguished. On the other hand the form P ...
P does not necessarily become P ... P' (P plus p), and in the form C ...
C' no difference whatever in value is visible between the two extremes.
It is therefore characteristic of the formula M ; M' that for one thing
capital-value is its starting-point and expanded capital-value its point
of return, so that the advance of capital-value appears as the means and
expanded capital-value as the end of the entire operation; and that for
another thing this relation is expressed in money-form, in the independent
value-form, hence money-capital as money begetting money. The generation
of surplus-value by value is not only expressed as the Alpha and Omega
of the process, but explicitly in the form of glittering money.

4. Since M', the money-capital realised as a result of C' ; M',
the complementary and concluding phase of M ; C, has absolutely the same
form as that in which it began its first circuit, it can, as soon as it
emerges from the latter, begin the same circuit over again as an increased
(accumulated) money-capital; M' = M + m. And at least it is not expressed
in the form M ... M' that, in the repetition of the circuit, the circulation
of m separates from that of M. Considered in its one-time form, formally,
the circuit of money-capital expresses therefore simply the process of
self-expansion and of accumulation. Consumption is expressed in it only
as productive consumption, 
by M ; C<LMP, and
it is only this consumption that is included in this circuit of individual
capital. M ; L is L ; M or C ; M on the part of the labourer. It is therefore the first phase of circulation which brings about his individual consumption,
thus: L ; M ; C (means of subsistence). The second phase M ; C, no longer falls within the circuit of individual capital, but is initiated and premised
by it, since the labourer must above all live, hence maintain himself by
individual consumption, in order to always be in the market as material
that the capitalist can exploit. But this consumption itself is here only
assumed as a condition for the productive consumption of labour-power by
capital, hence only to the extent that the worker maintains and reproduces
himself as labour-power by means of his individual consumption. However
the MP, the commodities proper which enter into the circuit of capital,
are nutriment for the productive consumption only. The act L ; M promotes
the individual consumption of the labourer, the transformation of the means
of subsistence into his flesh and blood. True, the capitalist must also
be there, must also live and consume to be able to perform the function
of a capitalist. To this end, he has, indeed, to consume only as much as
the labourer, and that is all this form of the circulation process presupposes.
But even this is not formally expressed, since the formula concludes with
M', i.e., a result which can at once resume its function as money-capital,
now augmented.

C' ; M' directly contains the sale of C'; but C' ; M', a sale
on the one part, is M ; C, a purchase, on the other part, and in the last
analysis a commodity is bought only for its use-value, in order to enter
(leaving intermediate sales out of consideration) the process of consumption,
whether this is individual or productive, according to the nature of the
article bought. But this consumption does not enter the circuit of individual
capital, the product of which is C'. This product is eliminated from the
circuit precisely because it is a commodity for sale. C' is expressly designed
for consumption by others than the producer. Thus we find that certain
exponents of the mercantile system (which is based on the formula M ; C
... P ... C' ; M') deliver lengthy sermons to the effect that the individual
capitalist should consume only as much as the labourer, that the nation
of capitalists should leave the consumption of their own commodities, and
the consumption process in general, to the other, less intelligent nations
but that they themselves should make productive consumption their life's
task. These sermons frequently remind one in form and content of analogous
ascetic expostulations of the fathers of the church.

Capital's movement in circuits is therefore the unity of circulation
and production; it includes both. Since the two phases M ; C and C' ; M'
are acts of circulation, the circulation of capital is a part of the general
circulation of commodities. But as functionally they are definite sections,
stages in capital's circuit, which pertains not only to the sphere of circulation
but also to that of production, capital goes through its own circuit in
the general circulation of commodities. The general circulation of commodities
serves capital in the first stage as a means of assuming that shape in
which it can perform the function of productive capital; in the second
stage it serves to strip off the commodity-function in which capital cannot
renew its circuit; at the same time it opens up to capital the possibility
of separating its own circuit from the circulation of the surplus-value
that accrued to it.

The circuit made by money-capital is therefore the most one-sided,
and thus the most striking and typical form in which the circuit of industrial
capital appears, the capital whose aim and compelling motive ; the self-expansion
of value, the making of money, and accumulation ; is thus conspicuously
revealed (buying to sell dearer). Owing to the fact that the first phase
is M ; C it is also revealed that the constituents of productive capital
originate in the commodity-market, and in general that the capitalist process
of production depends on circulation, on commerce. The circuit of money-capital
is not merely the production of commodities; it is itself possible only
through circulation and presupposes it. This is plain, if only from the
fact that the form M belonging in circulation appears as the first and
pure form of advanced capital-value, which is not the case in the other
two circuit forms.

The money-capital circuit always remains the general expression
of industrial capital, because it always includes the self-expansion of
the advanced value. In P ... P, the money-expression of capital appears
only as the price of the elements of production, hence only as a value
expressed in money of account and is fixed in this form in book-keeping.

M ... M' becomes a special form of the industrial capital circuit
when newly active capital is first advanced in the form of money and then
withdrawn in the same form, either in passing from one branch of industry
to another or in retiring industrial capital from a business. This includes
the functioning as capital of the surplus-value first advanced in the form
of money, and becomes most evident when surplus-value functions in some
other business than the one in which it originated. M ... M' may be the
first circuit of a certain capital; it may be the last; it may be regarded
as the form of the total social capital; it is the form of capital that
is newly invested, either as capital recently accumulated in the form of
money, or as some old capital which is entirely transformed into money
for the purpose of transfer from one branch of industry to another.

Being a form always contained in all circuits, money-capital performs
this circuit precisely for that part of capital which produces surplus-value,
viz., variable capital. The normal form of advancing wages is payment in
money; this process must be renewed in comparatively short intervals, because
the labourer lives from hand to mouth. The capitalist must therefore always
confront the labourer as money-capitalist, and his capital as money-capital.
There can be no direct or indirect balancing of accounts in this case such
as we find in the purchase of means of production and in the sale of produced
commodities (so that the greater part of the money-capital actually figures
only in the form of commodities, money only in the form of money of account
and finally in cash only in the balancing of accounts). On the other hand,
a part of the surplus-value arising out of variable capital is spent by
the capitalist for his individual consumption, which pertains to the retail
trade and, however circuitous the route may be, this part is always spent
in cash, in the money-form of surplus-value. Variable capital always appears
anew as money-capital invested in wages (M ; L) and m as surplus-value
to defray the cost of individual consumption of the capitalist. Hence M,
advanced variable capital-value, and m, its increment, are necessarily
held in the form of money to be spent in this form.

The formula M ; C ... P ... C' ; M', with its result M' = M +
m, is deceptive in form, is illusory in character, owing to the existence
of the advanced and self-expanded value in its equivalent form, money.
The emphasis is not on the self-expansion of value but on the money-form

of this process, on the fact that more value in money-form is finally drawn
out of the circulation than was originally advanced to it; hence on the
multiplication of the mass of gold and silver belonging to the capitalist.
The so-called monetary system is merely an expression of the irrational
form M ; C ; M', a movement which takes place exclusively in circulation
and therefore can explain the two acts M ; C and C ; M' in no other way
than as a sale of C above its value in the second act and therefore as
C drawing more money out of the circulation than was put into it by its
purchase. On the other hand M ; C ... P ... C' ; M', fixed as the exclusive
form, constitutes the basis of the more highly developed mercantile system,
in which not only the circulation of commodities but also their production
appears as a necessary element.

The illusory character of M ; C ... P ... C' ; M' and the correspondingly
illusory interpretation exists whenever this form is fixed as occurring
once, not as fluent and ever renewed; hence whenever this form is considered
not as one of the forms of the circuit but as its exclusive form. But it
itself points toward other forms.

In the first place this entire circuit is premised on the capitalist
character of the process of production, and therefore considers this process
together with the specific social conditions brought about by it as the
basis. M ; C = M ; C<LMP; but M ; L assumes the existence of the wage-labourer, and hence the means of production as part of productive capital. It assumes therefore that the process of labour and self-expansion, the process of production, is a function of capital.

In the second place, if M ... M' is repeated, the return to the
money-form appears just as evanescent as the money-form in the first stage.
M ; C disappears to make room for P. The constantly recurrent advance in
the form of money and its constant return in the form of money appear merely
as fleeting moments in the circuit.

In the third place

Beginning with the second repetition of the circuit, the circuit P ...
C' ; M'. M ; C ... P appears before the second circuit of M is completed,
and all subsequent circuits may thus be considered under the form of P
... C' ; M ; C ... P, so that M ; C, being the first phase of the first
circuit, is merely the passing preparation for the constantly repeated
circuit of the productive capital. And this indeed is so in the case of
industrial capital invested for the first time in the form of money-capital.

On the other hand before the second circuit of P is completed,
the first circuit, that of commodity-capital, C' ; M'.M ; C ... P ... C'
(abridged C' ... C') has already been made. Thus the first form already
contains the other two, and the money-form thus disappears, so far as it
is not merely an expression of value but an expression of value in the
equivalent form, in money.

Finally, if we consider some newly invested individual capital
describing for the first time the circuit M ; C ... P ... C' ; M', then
M ; C is the preparatory phase, the forerunner of the first process of
production gone through by this individual capital. This phase M ; C is
consequently not presupposed but rather called for or necessitated by the
process of production. But this applies only to this individual capital.
The general form of the circuit of industrial capital is the circuit
of money-capital, whenever the capitalist mode of production is taken
for granted, hence in social conditions determined by capitalist production.
Therefore the capitalist process of production is assumed as a pre-condition,
if not in the first circuit of the money-capital of a newly invested industrial
capital, then outside of it. The continuous existence of this process of
production presupposes the constantly renewed circuit P ... P. Even in
the first stage, M ; C, this premise plays a part, for this assumes on the one hand the existence of the class of wage-labourers; and then, on the other, that which is M ; C, the first
stage, for the buyer of means of production, is C' ; M' for their seller;
hence C' presupposes commodity-capital, and thus the commodities themselves
as a result of capitalist production, and thereby the function of productive
capital.

Notes

1. From Manuscript II. ; F.E.

2. Beginning of Manuscript VII, started July 1878.

3. End of Manuscript VII. Beginning of Manuscript VI. ; F.E.

4. End of Manuscript VI. Beginning of Manuscript V. ; F.E.

5. This is true no matter how we separate capital-value and surplus-value. 10,000 lbs. of yarn contain 1,560 lbs., or &pound;78 worth of surplus-value; likewise, one lb., or one shilling's worth of yarn, contains 2.496 ounces, or 1.872 pence worth, of surplus-value.

6. A. Chuprov, Railroading, Moscow, 1875, pp. 69 and 70.