III. THE PARTICULARITY OF CONTRADICTION

Contradiction is present in the process of development of all things; it
permeates the process of development of each thing from beginning to end.
This is the universality and absoluteness of contradiction which we have
discussed above. Now let us discuss the particularity and relativity of
contradiction.

This problem should be studied on several levels.

First, the contradiction in each form of motion of matter has its particularity.
Man's knowledge of matter is knowledge of its forms of motion, because there
is nothing in this world except matter in motion and this motion must assume
certain forms. In considering each form of motion of matter, we must observe
the points which it has in common with other forms of motion. But what is
especially important and necessary, constituting as it does the foundation
of our knowledge of a thing, is to observe what is particular to this form
of motion of matter, namely, to observe the qualitative difference between
this form of motion and other forms. Only when we have done so can we distinguish
between things. Every form of motion contains within itself its own particular
contradiction. This particular contradiction constitutes the particular essence
which distinguishes one thing from another. It is the internal cause or,
as it may be called, the basis for the immense variety of things in the world.
There are many forms of motion in nature, mechanical motion, sound, light,
heat, electricity, dissociation, combination, and so on. All these forms
are interdependent, but in its essence each is different from the others.
The particular essence of each form of motion is determined by its own particular
contradiction. This holds true not only for nature but also for social and
ideological phenomena. Every form of society, every form of ideology, has
its own particular contradiction and particular essence.

The sciences are differentiated precisely on the basis of the particular
contradictions inherent in their respective objects of study. Thus the
contradiction peculiar to a certain field of phenomena constitutes the object
of study for a specific branch of science. For example, positive and negative
numbers in mathematics; action and reaction in mechanics; positive and negative
electricity in physics; dissociation and combination in chemistry; forces
of production and relations of production, classes and class struggle, in
social science; offence and defence in military science; idealism and
materialism, the metaphysical outlook and the dialectical outlook, in philosophy;
and so on; all these are the objects of study of different branches of science
precisely because each branch has its own particular contradiction and particular
essence. Of course, unless we understand the universality of contradiction,
we have no way of discovering the universal cause or universal basis for
the movement or development of things; however, unless we study the particularity
of contradiction, we have no way of determining the particular essence of
a thing which differentiates it from other things, no way of discovering
the particular cause or particular basis for the movement or development
of a thing, and no way of distinguishing one thing from another or of demarcating
the fields of science.

As regards the sequence in the movement of man's knowledge, there is always
a gradual growth from the knowledge of individual and particular things to
the knowledge of things in general. Only after man knows the particular essence
of many different things can he proceed to generalization and know the common
essence of things.

When man attains the knowledge of this common essence, he uses it as a guide
and proceeds to study various concrete things which have not yet been studied,
or studied thoroughly, and to discover the particular essence of each; only
thus is he able to supplement, enrich and develop his knowledge of their
common essence and prevent such knowledge from withering or petrifying. These
are the two processes of cognition: one, from the particular to the general,
and the other, from the general to the particular. Thus cognition always
moves in cycles and (so long as scientific method is strictly adhered to)
each cycle advances human knowledge a step higher and so makes it more and
more profound. Where our dogmatists err on this question is that, on the
one hand, they do not understand that we have to study the particularity
of contradiction and know the particular essence of individual things before
we can adequately know the universality of contradiction and the common essence
of things, and that, on the other hand, they do not understand that after
knowing the common essence of things, we must go further and study the concrete
things that have not yet been thoroughly studied or have only just emerged.
Our dogmatists are lazy-bones. They refuse to undertake any painstaking study
of concrete things, they regard general truths as emerging out of the void,
they turn them into purely abstract unfathomable formulas, and thereby completely
deny and reverse the normal sequence by which man comes to know truth. Nor
do they understand the interconnection of the two processes in cognition; 
from the particular to the general and then from the general to the particular.
They understand nothing of the Marxist theory of knowledge.

It is necessary not only to study the particular contradiction and the essence
determined thereby of every great system of the forms of motion of matter,
but also to study the particular contradiction and the essence of each process
in the long course of development of each form of motion of matter. In every
form of motion, each process of development which is real (and not imaginary)
is qualitatively different. Our study must emphasize and start from this
point.

Qualitatively different contradictions can only be resolved by qualitatively
different methods. For instance, the contradiction between the proletariat
and the bourgeoisie is resolved by the method of socialist revolution; the
contradiction between the great masses of the people and the feudal system
is resolved by the method of democratic revolution; the contradiction between
the colonies and imperialism is resolved by the method of national revolutionary
war; the contradiction between the working class and the peasant class in
socialist society is resolved by the method of collectivization and mechanization
in agriculture; contradiction within the Communist Party is resolved by the
method of criticism and self-criticism; the contradiction between society
and nature is resolved by the method of developing the productive forces.
Processes change, old processes and old contradictions disappear, new processes
and new contradictions emerge, and the methods of resolving contradictions
differ accordingly. In Russia, there was a fundamental difference between
the contradiction resolved by the February Revolution and the contradiction
resolved by the October Revolution, as well as between the methods used to
resolve them. The principle of using different methods to resolve different
contradictions is one which Marxist-Leninists must strictly observe. The
dogmatists do not observe this principle; they do not understand that conditions
differ in different kinds of revolution and so do not understand that different
methods should be used to resolve different contradictions; on the contrary,
they invariably adopt what they imagine to be an unalterable formula and
arbitrarily apply it everywhere, which only causes setbacks to the revolution
or makes a sorry mess of what was originally well done.

In order to reveal the particularity of the contradictions in any process
in the development of a thing, in their totality or interconnections, that
is, in order to reveal the essence of the process, it is necessary to reveal
the particularity of the two aspects of each of the contradictions in that
process; otherwise it will be impossible to discover the essence of the process.
This likewise requires the utmost attention in our study.

There are many contradictions in the course of development of any
major thing. For instance, in the course of China's bourgeois-democratic
revolution, where the conditions are exceedingly complex, there exist the
contradiction between all the oppressed classes in Chinese society and
imperialism, the contradiction between the great masses of the people and
feudalism, the contradiction between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie,
the contradiction between the peasantry and the urban petty bourgeoisie on
the one hand and the bourgeoisie on the other, the contradiction between
the various reactionary ruling groups, and so on. These contradictions cannot
be treated in the same way since each has its own particularity; moreover,
the two aspects of each contradiction cannot be treated in the same way since
each aspect has its own characteristics. We who are engaged in the Chinese
revolution should not only understand the particularity of these contradictions
in their totality, that is, in their interconnections, but should also study
the two aspects of each contradiction as the only means of understanding
the totality. When we speak of understanding each aspect of a contradiction,
we mean understanding what specific position each aspect occupies, what concrete
forms it assumes in its interdependence and in its contradiction with its
opposite, and what concrete methods are employed in the struggle with its
opposite, when the two are both interdependent and in contradiction, and
also after the interdependence breaks down. It is of great importance to
study these problems. Lenin meant just this when he said that the most essential
thing in Marxism, the living soul of Marxism, is the concrete analysis of
concrete conditions. [10] Our dogmatists have violated
Lenin's teachings; they never use their brains to analyse anything concretely,
and in their writings and speeches they always use stereotypes devoid of
content, thereby creating a very bad style of work in our Party.

In studying a problem, we must shun subjectivity, one-sidedness and
superficiality. To be subjective means not to look at problems objectively,
that is, not to use the materialist viewpoint in looking at problems. I have
discussed this in my essay "On Practice". To be one-sided means not to look
at problems all-sidedly, for example, to understand only China but not Japan,
only the Communist Party but not the Kuomintang, only the proletariat but
not the bourgeoisie, only the peasants but not the landlords, only the favourable
conditions but not the difficult ones, only the past but not the future,
only individual parts but not the whole, only the defects but not the
achievements, only the plaintiff's case but not the defendant's, only underground
revolutionary work but not open revolutionary work, and so on. In a word,
it means not to understand the characteristics of both aspects of a
contradiction. This is what we mean by looking at a problem one-sidedly.
Or it may be called seeing the part but not the whole, seeing the trees but
not the forest. That way it is impossible to find the method for resolving
a contradiction, it is impossible to accomplish the tasks of the revolution,
to carry out assignments well or to develop inner-Party ideological struggle
correctly. When Sun Wu Tzu said in discussing military science, "Know the
enemy and know yourself, and you can fight a hundred battles with no danger
of defeat", [11] he was referring to the two sides in
a battle. Wei Chengi [12] of the Tang Dynasty also understood
the error of one-sidedness when he said, "Listen to both sides and you will
be enlightened, heed only one side and you will be benighted." But our comrades
often look at problems one-sidedly, and so they often run into snags. In
the novel Shui Hu Chuan, Sung Chiang thrice attacked Chu Village.
[13] Twice he was defeated because he was ignorant of
the local conditions and used the wrong method. Later he changed his method;
first he investigated the situation, and he familiarized himself with the
maze of roads, then he broke up the alliance between the Li, Hu and Chu Villages
and sent his men in disguise into the enemy camp to lie in wait, using a
stratagem similar to that of the Trojan Horse in the foreign story. And on
the third occasion he won. There are many examples of materialist dialectics
in Shui Hu Chuan, of which the episode of the three attacks on Chu
Village is one of the best. Lenin said:

 ... in order really to know an object we must embrace, study, all its sides,
 all connections and "mediations". We shall never achieve this completely,
 but the demand for all-sidedness is a safeguard against mistakes and
 rigidity.[14]

We should remember his words. To be superficial means to consider neither
the characteristics of a contradiction in its totality nor the characteristics
of each of its aspects; it means to deny the necessity for probing deeply
into a thing and minutely studying the characteristics of its contradiction,
but instead merely to look from afar and, after glimpsing the rough outline,
immediately to try to resolve the contradiction (to answer a question, settle
a dispute, handle work, or direct a military operation). This way of doing
things is bound to lead to trouble. The reason the dogmatist and empiricist
comrades in China have made mistakes lies precisely in their subjectivist,
one-sided and superficial way of looking at things. To be one-sided and
superficial is at the same time to be subjective. For all objective things
are actually interconnected and are governed by inner laws, but instead of
undertaking the task of reflecting things as they really are some people
only look at things one-sidedly or superficially and who know neither their
interconnections nor their inner laws, and so their method is subjectivist.

Not only does the whole process of the movement of opposites in the development
of a thing, both in their interconnections and in each of the aspects, have
particular features to which we must give attention, but each stage
in the process has its particular features to which we must give attention
too.

The fundamental contradiction in the process of development of a thing and
the essence of the process determined by this fundamental contradiction will
not disappear until the process is completed; but in a lengthy process the
conditions usually differ at each stage. The reason is that, although the
nature of the fundamental contradiction in the process of development of
a thing and the essence of the process remain unchanged, the fundamental
contradiction becomes more and more intensified as it passes from one stage
to another in the lengthy process. In addition, among the numerous major
and minor contradictions which are determined or influenced by the fundamental
contradiction, some become intensified, some are temporarily or partially
resolved or mitigated, and some new ones emerge; hence the process is marked
by stages. If people do not pay attention to the stages in the process of
development of a thing, they cannot deal with its contradictions properly.

For instance, when the capitalism of the era of free competition developed
into imperialism, there was no change in the class nature of the two classes
in fundamental contradiction, namely, the proletariat and the bourgeoisie,
or in the capitalist essence of society; however, the contradiction between
these two classes became intensified, the contradiction between monopoly
and non-monopoly capital emerged, the contradiction between the colonial
powers and the colonies became intensified, the contradiction among the
capitalist countries resulting from their uneven development manifested itself
with particular sharpness, and thus there arose the special stage of capitalism,
the stage of imperialism. Leninism is the Marxism of the era of imperialism
and proletarian revolution precisely because Lenin and Stalin have correctly
explained these contradictions and correctly formulated the theory and tactics
of the proletarian revolution for their resolution.

Take the process of China's bourgeois-democratic revolution, which began
with the Revolution of 1911; it, too, has several distinct stages. In particular,
the revolution in its period of bourgeois leadership and the revolution in
its period of proletarian leadership represent two vastly different historical
stages. In other words, proletarian leadership has fundamentally changed
the whole face of the revolution, has brought about a new alignment of classes,
given rise to a tremendous upsurge in the peasant revolution, imparted
thoroughness to the revolution against imperialism and feudalism, created
the possibility of the transition from the democratic revolution to the socialist
revolution, and so on. None of these was possible in the period when the
revolution was under bourgeois leadership. Although no change has taken place
in the nature of the fundamental contradiction in the process as a whole,
i.e., in the anti-imperialist, anti-feudal, democratic-revolutionary
nature of the process (the opposite of which is its semi-colonial and semi-feudal
nature), nonetheless this process has passed through several stages of
development in the course of more than twenty years; during this time many
great events have taken place; the failure of the Revolution of 1911 and
the establishment of the regime of the Northern warlords, the formation of
the first national united front and the revolution of 1924-27, the break-up
of the united front and the desertion of the bourgeoisie to the side of the
counterrevolution, the wars among the new warlords, the Agrarian Revolutionary
War, the establishment of the second national united front and the War of
Resistance Against Japan. These stages are marked by particular features
such as the intensification of certain contradictions (e.g., the Agrarian
Revolutionary War and the Japanese invasion of the four northeastern provinces),
the partial or temporary resolution of other contradictions (e.g., the
destruction of the Northern warlords and our confiscation of the land of
the landlords), and the emergence of yet other contradictions (e.g., the
conflicts among the new warlords, and the landlords' recapture of the land
after the loss of our revolutionary base areas in the south).

In studying the particularities of the contradictions at each stage in the
process of development of a thing, we must not only observe them in their
interconnections or their totality, we must also examine the two aspects
of each contradiction.

For instance, consider the Kuomintang and the Communist Party. Take one aspect,
the Kuomintang. In the period of the first united front, the Kuomintang carried
out Sun Yat-sen's Three Great Policies of alliance with Russia, co-operation
with the Communist Party, and assistance to the peasants and workers; hence
it was revolutionary and vigorous, it was an alliance of various classes
for the democratic revolution. After 1927, however, the Kuomintang changed
into its opposite and became a reactionary bloc of the landlords and big
bourgeoisie. After the Sian Incident in December 1936, it began another change
in the direction of ending the civil war and co-operating with the Communist
Party for joint opposition to Japanese imperialism. Such have been the particular
features of the Kuomintang in the three stages. Of course, these features
have arisen from a variety of causes. Now take the other aspect, the Chinese
Communist Party. In the period of the first united front, the Chinese Communist
Party was in its infancy; it courageously led the revolution of 1924-27 but
revealed its immaturity in its understanding of the character, the tasks
and the methods of the revolution, and consequently it became possible for
Chen Tu-hsiuism, which appeared during the latter part of this revolution,
to assert itself and bring about the defeat of the revolution. After 1927,
the Communist Party courageously led the Agrarian Revolutionary War and created
the revolutionary army and revolutionary base areas; however, it committed
adventurist errors which brought about very great losses both to the army
and to the base areas. Since 1935 the Party has corrected these errors and
has been leading the new united front for resistance to Japan; this great
struggle is now developing. At the present stage, the Communist Party is
a Party that has gone through the test of two revolutions and acquired a
wealth of experience. Such have been the particular features of the Chinese
Communist Party in the three stages. These features, too, have arisen from
a variety of causes. Without studying both these sets of features we cannot
understand the particular relations between the two parties during the various
stages of their development, namely, the establishment of a united front,
the break-up of the united front, and the establishment of another united
front. What is even more fundamental for the study of the particular features
of the two parties is the examination of the class basis of the two parties
and the resultant contradictions which have arisen between each party and
other forces at different periods. For instance, in the period of its first
cooperation with the Communist Party, the Kuomintang stood in contradiction
to foreign imperialism and was therefore anti-imperialist; on the other hand,
it stood in contradiction to the great masses of the people within the
country; although in words it promised many benefits to the working people,
in fact it gave them little or nothing. In the period when it carried on
the anti-Communist war, the Kuomintang collaborated with imperialism and
feudalism against the great masses of the people and wiped out all the gains
they had won in the revolution, and thereby intensified its contradictions
with them. In the present period of the anti-Japanese war, the Kuomintang
stands in contradiction to Japanese imperialism and wants co-operation with
the Communist Party, without however relaxing its struggle against the Communist
Party and the people or its oppression of them. As for the Communist Party,
it has always, in every period, stood with the great masses of the people
against imperialism and feudalism, but in the present period of the anti-Japanese
war, it has adopted a moderate policy towards the Kuomintang and the domestic
feudal forces because the Kuomintang has pressed itself in favour of resisting
Japan. The above circumstances have resulted now in alliance between the
two parties and now in struggle between them, and even during the periods
of alliance there has been a complicated state of simultaneous alliance and
struggle. If we do not study the particular features of both aspects of the
contradiction, we shall fail to understand not only the relations of each
party with the other forces, but also the relations between the two parties.

It can thus be seen that in studying the particularity of any kind of
contradiction; the contradiction in each form of motion of matter, the
contradiction in each of its processes of development, the two aspects of
the contradiction in each process, the contradiction at each stage of a process,
and the two aspects of the contradiction at each stage; in studying the
particularity of all these contradictions, we must not be subjective and
arbitrary but must analyse it concretely. Without concrete analysis there
can be no knowledge of the particularity of any contradiction. We must always
remember Lenin's words, the concrete analysis of concrete conditions.

Marx and Engels were the first to provide us with excellent models of such
concrete analysis.

When Marx and Engels applied the law of contradiction in things to the study
of the socio-historical process, they discovered the contradiction between
the productive forces and the relations of production, they discovered the
contradiction between the exploiting and exploited classes and also the resultant
contradiction between the economic base and its superstructure (politics,
ideology, etc.), and they discovered how these contradictions inevitably
lead to different kinds of social revolution in different kinds of class
society.

When Marx applied this law to the study of the economic structure of capitalist
society, he discovered that the basic contradiction of this society is the
contradiction between the social character of production and the private
character of ownership. This contradiction manifests itself in the contradiction
between the organized character of production in individual enterprises and
the anarchic character of production in society as a whole. In terms of class
relations, it manifests itself in the contradiction between the bourgeoisie
and the proletariat.

Because the range of things is vast and there is no limit to their development,
what is universal in one context becomes particular in another. Conversely,
what is particular in one context becomes universal in another. The contradiction
in the capitalist system between the social character of production and the
private ownership of the means of production is common to all countries where
capitalism exists and develops; as far as capitalism is concerned, this
constitutes the universality of contradiction. But this contradiction of
capitalism belongs only to a certain historical stage in the general development
of class society; as far as the contradiction between the productive forces
and the relations of production in class society as a whole is concerned,
it constitutes the particularity of contradiction. However, in the course
of dissecting the particularity of all these contradictions in capitalist
society, Marx gave a still more profound, more adequate and more complete
elucidation of the universality of the contradiction between the productive
forces and the relations of production in class society in general.

Since the particular is united with the universal and since the universality
as well as the particularity of contradiction is inherent in everything,
universality residing in particularity, we should, when studying an object,
try to discover both the particular and the universal and their interconnection,
to discover both particularity and universality and also their interconnection
within the object itself, and to discover the interconnections of this object
with the many objects outside it. When Stalin explained the historical roots
of Leninism in his famous work, The Foundations of Leninism, he analysed
the international situation in which Leninism arose, analysed those
contradictions of capitalism which reached their culmination under imperialism,
and showed how these contradictions made proletarian revolution a matter
for immediate action and created favourable conditions for a direct onslaught
on capitalism. What is more, he analysed the reasons why Russia became the
cradle of Leninism, why tsarist Russia became the focus of all the contradictions
of imperialism, and why it was possible for the Russian proletariat to become
the vanguard of the international revolutionary proletariat. Thus, Stalin
analysed the universality of contradiction in imperialism, showing why Leninism
is the Marxism of the era of imperialism and proletarian revolution, and
at the same time analysed the particularity of tsarist Russian imperialism
within this general contradiction, showing why Russia became the birthplace
of the theory and tactics of proletarian revolution and how the universality
of contradiction is contained in this particularity. Stalin's analysis provides
us with a model for understanding the particularity and the universality
of contradiction and their interconnection.

On the question of using dialectics in the study of objective phenomena,
Marx and Engels, and likewise Lenin and Stalin, always enjoin people not
to be in any way subjective and arbitrary but, from the concrete conditions
in the actual objective movement of these phenomena, to discover their concrete
contradictions, the concrete position of each aspect of every contradiction
and the concrete interrelations of the contradictions. Our dogmatists do
not have this attitude in study and therefore can never get anything right.
We must take warning from their failure and learn to acquire this attitude,
which is the only correct one in study.

The relationship between the universality and the particularity of contradiction
is the relationship between the general character and the individual character
of contradiction. By the former we mean that contradiction exists in and
runs through all processes from beginning to end; motion, things, processes,
thinking; all are contradictions. To deny contradiction is to deny everything.
This is a universal truth for all times and all countries, which admits of
no exception. Hence the general character, the absoluteness of contradiction.
But this general character is contained in every individual character; without
individual character there can be no general character. If all individual
character were removed, what general character would remain? It is because
each contradiction is particular that individual character arises. All individual
character exists conditionally and temporarily, and hence is relative.

This truth concerning general and individual character, concerning absoluteness
and relativity, is the quintessence of the problem of contradiction in things;
failure to understand it is tantamount to abandoning dialectics.