I. Simple Reproduction

Let us first consider the process C' ; M' ; C, which takes place in
the sphere of circulation between the two extremes P ... P.

The starting-point of this circulation is commodity-capital; C'
= C + c = P + c. The function of commodity-capital C' ; M' (the realisation
of the capital-value contained in it equals P, which now exists as the
constituent part C of C', as well as of the surplus-value contained in
it, which exists as a constituent part of the same quantity of commodities
and has the value c) was examined in the first form of the circuit. But
there this function formed the second phase of the interrupted circulation
and the concluding phase of the entire circuit. Here it forms the second
phase of the circuit but the first phase of the circulation. The first
circuit ends with M', and since M' as well as the original M can again
open the second circuit as money-capital, it was not necessary at first
to see whether M and m (surplus-value) contained in M' continue in their
course together or whether each of them pursues its own course. This would
only have become necessary if we had followed up further the first circuit
in its renewed course. But this point must be decided in the circuit of
the productive capital, because the determination of its very first circuit
depends on it and because C' ; M' appears in it as the first phase of the
circulation, which has to be complemented by M ; C. It depends on this
decision whether the formula represents simple reproduction or reproduction
on an extended scale. The character of the circuit changes according to
the decision made.

Let us, then, consider first the simple reproduction of productive
capital, assuming that, as in the first chapter, conditions remain constant
and that commodities are bought and sold at their values.

On this assumption the entire surplus-value enters into the individual
consumption of the capitalist. As soon as the transformation of the commodity-capital
C' into money has taken place, that part of the money which represents
the capital-value continues to circulate in the circuit of industrial capital;
the other part, which is surplus-value changed into money, enters into
the general circulation of commodities, constitutes a circulation of money
emanating from the capitalist but taking place outside of the circulation
of his individual capital.

In our illustration we had a commodity-capital C' of 10,000 lbs.
of yarn, valued at &pound;500; &pound;422 of this represent the value of
the productive capital and continue, as the money-form of 8,440 lbs. of
yarn, the capital circulation begun by C', while the surplus value of &pound;78,
the money-form of 1,560 lbs. of yarn, the excess of the commodity-product,
leaves this circulation and describes a separate course within the general
circulation of commodities.

m ; c represents a series of purchases by means of money which the capitalist
spends either for commodities proper or for personal services to his cherished
self or family. These purchases are made piecemeal at various times. The
money therefore exists temporarily in the form of a supply, or hoard, destined
for current consumption, since money whose circulation has been interrupted
assumes the form of a hoard. Its function as a medium of circulation, which
includes its transient form of a hoard, does not enter the circulation
of capital in its money-form M. This money is not advanced but spent.

We have assumed that the total advanced capital always passes
wholly from one of its phases to the other; and so here too we assume that
the commodities produced by P represent the total value of the productive
capital P, or &pound;422 plus &pound;78 of surplus-value created in the
process of production. In our illustration, which deals with a discrete
commodity, the surplus-value exists in the form of 1,560 lbs. of yarn;
if computed on the basis of one pound of yarn, it would exist in the form
of 2.496 ounces of yarn. But if the commodity were for instance a machine
valued at &pound;500 and having the same value-composition, one a part of the
value of this machine, &pound;78, would be surplus-value, but these &pound;78
would exist only in the machine as a whole. This machine cannot be divided
into capital-value and surplus-value without breaking it to pieces and
thus destroying its value together with its use-value. For this reason
the two value-components can be represented only ideally as components
of the commodity, not as independent elements of the commodity C', like
any pound of yarn, which represents a separable independent element of
the 10,000 lbs. of commodity. In the first case the aggregate commodity,
the commodity-capital, the machine, must be sold in its entirety before
m can enter upon its separate circulation. On the other hand when the capitalist
has sold 8,440 lbs., the sale of the remaining 1,560 lbs. would represent
a wholly separate circulation of the surplus-value in the form of c (1,560
lbs. of yarn) ; m (&pound;78) ; c (articles of consumption). But the elements of value of each individual portion of the 10,000 lbs. of yarn, the product,
can be represented by parts of the product as well as by the total product.
Just as the latter, 10,000 lbs. of yarn, the product, can be represented
by parts of the product as well as by the total product. Just as the latter,
10,000 lbs. of yarn, can be divided into the value of the constant capital
(c), 7,440 lbs. of yarn worth &pound;372, variable capital-value (v) of
1,000 lbs. of yarn worth &pound;50, and surplus-value (s) of 1,560 lbs.
of yarn worth &pound;78, so every pound of yarn may be divided into c,
equal to 11.904 ounces worth 8.928 d., v equal to 1.600 ounces of yarn
worth 1.200 d., and s equal to 2.496 ounces of yarn worth 1.872 d. The
capitalist might also sell various portions of the 10,000 lbs. of yarn
successively and successively consume successive portions of the surplus-value
elements contained in them, thus realising, also successively, the sum
of c plus v. But in the final analysis this operation likewise premises
the sale of the entire lot of 10,000 lbs., that therefore the value of
c and v will be replaced by the sale of 8,440 lbs. (Buch I, Kap. VII, 2.)
[English edition: Ch. IX, 2. ; Ed.]

However that may be, by means of C' ; M' both the capital-value
and surplus-value contained in C' acquire a separable existence, the existence
of different sums of money. In both cases M and m are really a converted
form of the value which originally in C' had only a peculiar, an ideal
expression as the price of the commodity.

c ; m ; c represents the simple circulation of commodities, the
first phase of which, c ; m, is included in the circulation of commodity-capital,
C' ; M', i.e., included in the circuit of capital; its complementary phase
m ; c falls, on the contrary, outside of this circuit, being a separate
act in the general circulation of commodities. The circulation of C and
c, of capital-value and surplus-value, splits after the transformation
of C' into M'. Hence it follows:

First, while the commodity-capital is realised by C' ; M' = C' ; (M
+ m), the movement of capital-value and surplus-value, which in C' ; M'
is still united and carried on by the same quantity of commodities, becomes
separable, both of them henceforth possessing independent forms as separate
sums of money.

Secondly, if this separation takes place, m being spent as the
revenue of the capitalist, while M as a functional form of capital-value
continues its course determined by the circuit, the first act, C' ; M',
in connection with the subsequent acts, M ; C and m ; c, may be represented as two different circulations C ; M ; C and c ; m ; c; and both of these series, so far as their general form is concerned, belong in the usual circulation of commodities.

By the way, in the case of the continuous, indivisible commodities,
it is a matter of practice to isolate the value constituents ideally. For
instance in the London building-business, which is carried on mainly on
credit, the building contractor receives advances in accordance with the
stage of construction reached. None of these stages is a house, but only
a really existing constituent part of an inchoate future house; hence,
in spite of its reality, it is but an ideal fraction of the entire house,
but real enough to serve as security for an additional advance. (See on
this point Chapter XII below.) [See pp. 237-38 of this book. ; Ed.]

Thirdly, if the movement of capital-value and surplus-value, which
still proceeds unitedly in C and M, is separated only in part (a portion
of the surplus-value not being spent as revenue) or not at all, a change
takes place in the capital-value itself within its circuit, before it is
completed. In our illustration the value of the productive capital was
equal to &pound;422. If that capital continues M ; C, as, say, &pound;480
or &pound;500, then it strides through the latter stages of its circuit
with an increase of &pound;58 or &pound;78 over its initial value. This
may also go hand in hand with a change in the composition of its value.

C' ; M', the second stage of the circulation and the final stage
of circuit I (M ... M'), is the second stage in our circuit and the first
in the circulation of commodities. So far as the circulation is concerned,
it must be complemented by M' ; C'. But not only has C' ; M' the process
of self-expansion already behind it (in this case the function of P, the
first stage), but its result, the commodity C'; has already been realised.
The process of the self-expansion of capital and the realisation of the
commodities representing the expanded capital-value are therefore completed
in C' ; M'.

And so we have premised simple reproduction, i.e., that m ; c
separates entirely from M ; C. Since both circulations, c ; m ; c as well as C ; M ; C, belong in the circulation of commodities, so far as their general form is concerned (and for this reason do not show only value differences
in their extremes), it is easy to conceive the process of capitalist production,
after the manner of vulgar economy, as a mere production of commodities,
of use-values designed for consumption of some sort, which the capitalist
produces for no other purpose than that of getting in their place commodities
with different use-values, or of exchanging them for such, as vulgar economy
erroneously states.

C' acts from the very outset as commodity-capital, and the purpose
of the entire process, enrichment (the production of surplus-value), does
not by any means exclude increasing consumption on the part of the capitalist
as his surplus-value (and hence his capital) increases; on the contrary,
it emphatically includes it.

Indeed, in the circulation of the revenue of the capitalist, the
produced commodity c (or the fraction of the produced commodity C' ideally
corresponding to it) serves only to transform it, first into money, and
from money into a number of other commodities serving private consumption.
But we must not, at this point, overlook the trifling circumstance that
c is commodity-value which did not cost the capitalist anything, an incarnation
of surplus-labour, for which reason it originally stepped on the stage
as a component part of commodity-capital C'. This c is, by the very nature
of its existence, bound to the circuit of capital-value in process and
if this circuit begins to stagnate or is otherwise disturbed, not only
the consumption of c restricted or entirely arrested, but also the disposal
of that series of commodities which serve to replace c. The same is true
when C' ; M' ends in failure, or only a part of C' can be sold.

We have seen that c ; m ; c, representing the circulation of the
revenue of the capitalist, enters into the circulation of capital only
so long as c is a part of the value of C', of capital in its functional
form of commodity-capital; but, as soon as it acquires independence from
m ; c, hence throughout the form c ; m ; c, the circulation of that revenue does not enter into the movement of the capital advanced by the capitalist,
although it stems from it. This circulation is connected with the movement
of advanced capital inasmuch as the existence of capital presupposes the
existence of the capitalist, and his existence is conditioned on his consuming
surplus-value.

Within the general circulation C', for example yarn, functions
only as a commodity; but as an element in the circulation of capital it
performs the function of commodity-capital, a form which capital-value
alternately assumes and discards. After the sale of the yarn to a merchant,
it is extruded out of the circular movement of capital whose product it
is, but nevertheless, as a commodity, it moves always in the sphere of
the general circulation. The circulation of one and the same mass of commodities
continues, in spite of the fact that it has ceased to be a phase in the
independent circuit of the spinner's capital. Hence the real definitive
metamorphosis of the mass of commodities thrown into circulation by the
capitalist, C ; M, their final exit into consumption may be completely
separated in time and space from that metamorphosis in which this mass
of commodities functions as his commodity-capital. The same metamorphosis
which has been accomplished in the circulation of capital still remains
to be accomplished in the sphere of the general circulation.

This state of things is not changed a bit if this yarn enters
the circuit of some other industrial capital. The general circulation comprises
as much the intertwining of the circuits of the various independent fractions
of social capital, i.e., the totality of the individual capitals, as the
circulation of those values which are not thrown on the market as capital
but enter into individual consumption.

The relation between a circuit of capital forming part of a general
circulation and a circuit forming links in an independent circuit is shown
further on when we examine the circulation of M, which is equal to M plus
m. M as money-capital continues capital's circuit; m, being spent as revenue
(m ; c), enters into the general circulation, but comes flying out of the
circuit of capital. Only that part enters the latter circuit which performs
the function of additional money-capital. In c ; m ; c money serves only
as coin; the object of this circulation is the individual consumption of
the capitalist. It is typical of the idiocy of vulgar economy that it gives
out this circulation, which does not enter into the circuit of capital
; the circulation of that part of the value produced which is consumed
as revenue ; as the characteristic circuit of capital.

In the second phase M ; C, the capital-value M, which is equal
to P (the value of the productive capital that at this point opens the
circuit of industrial capital), is again present, delivered of its surplus-value,
therefore having the same magnitude of value as it had in the first stage
of the circuit of money-capital M ; C. In spite of the difference in place
the function of the money-capital into which the commodity-capital has
now been transformed is the same: its transformation into MP and L, into
means of production and labour-power.

In the functioning of commodity-capital C' ; M', the capital-value,
simultaneously with c ; m, has consequently gone through the phase C ; M and enters now into the complementary phase
M ; C<LMP.
Its complete circulation is therefore 
C ; M; C<LMP.

First: Money-capital M appeared in Form I (circuit M ... M') as
the original form in which capital-value is advanced; it appears here from
the outset as a part of that sum of money into which commodity-capital
transformed itself in the first circulation phase C' ; M', therefore from
the outset as the transformation of P, the productive capital, through
the medium of the sale of commodities, into the money-form. Money-capital
exists here from the outset as that form of capital-value which is neither
its original nor its final one, since the phase M ; C, which concludes
the phase C ; M, can only be performed by again discarding the money-form.
Therefore that part of M ; C which is at the same time M ; L appears now
no longer as a mere advance of money by the purchase of labour-power, but
as an advance by means of which the same 1,000 lbs. of yarn, valued at
&pound;50, which form a part of the commodity-value created by labour-power,
are advanced to labour-power in the form of money. The money advanced
here to the labourer is only a converted equivalent form of a part of the
commodity-value produced by himself. And for that reason if no other the
act M ; C, so far as it means M ; L, is by no means simply a replacement
of a commodity in the form of money by a commodity in the use-form, but
it includes other elements which are independent of the general commodity
circulation as such.

M' appears as a converted form of C', which is itself a product
of a previous function of P, the process of production. The entire sum
of money M' is therefore a money-expression of past labour. In our illustration,
10,000 lbs. of yarn worth &pound;500 are the product of the spinning process.
Of this quantity, 7,440 lbs. of yarn are equal to the advanced constant
capital c worth &pound;372; 1,000 lbs. of yarn are equal to the advanced
variable capital v worth &pound;50; and 1,560 lbs. of yarn represent the
surplus-value s worth &pound;78. If of M' only the original capital of
&pound;422 is again advanced, other conditions remaining the same, then
the labourer is advanced the following week, in M ; L, only a part of the
10,000 lbs. of yarn produced in the given week (the money-value of 1,000
lbs. of yarn). As a result of C ; M, money is always the expression of
past labour. If the complementary act M ; C takes place at once in the
commodity-market, i.e., M is given in return for commodities existing in
the market, this is again a transformation of past labour, from one form
(money) into another form (commodities). But M ; C differs in the matter
of time from C ; M. They may exceptionally take place at the same time,
for instance when the capitalist who performs M ; C and the capitalist
to whom this act means C ; M ship their commodities to each other at the
same time and M is used only to square the balance. The difference in time
between the performance of M ; C and C ; M may be more or less considerable. Although M, as the result of C ; M, represents past labour, it may, in the act M ; C, represent the converted form of commodities which are not
as yet in the market, but will be thrown upon it in the future, since M ; C
need not take place until C has been produced anew. M may likewise stand
for commodities which are produced simultaneously with the C whose money-expression
it is. For instance in the exchange M ; C (purchase of means of production)
coal may be bought before it has been mined. In so far as m figures as
an accumulation of money, is not spent as revenue, it may stand for cotton
which will not be produced until the following year. The same holds good
on spending the revenue of the capitalist, m ; c. It also applies to wages,
to L equal to &pound;50. This money is not only the money-form of past
labour of the labourers but at the same time a draft on simultaneous and
future labour which is just being realised or should be realised in the
future. The labourer may buy with his wages a coat which will not be made
until the following week. This applies especially to the vast number of
necessary means of subsistence which must be consumed almost as soon as
they have been produced to prevent spoilage. Thus the labourer receives,
in the money which is paid to him in wages, the converted form of his own
future labour or that of other labourers. By giving the labourer a part
of his past labour, the capitalist gives him a draft on his own future
labour. It is the labourer's own simultaneous or future labour that constitutes
the not yet existing supply out of which he will be paid for his past labour.
In this case the idea of hoarding disappears altogether. [Here Marx made
the following note in the manuscript: "All this, however, belongs to the
last part of Book Two." ; Ed.]

Secondly: In the circulation 
C ; M ; C<LMP
the same money changes place twice; the capitalist first receives it as
a seller and passes it on as a buyer; the transformation of commodities
into the money-form serves only for the purpose of retransforming it from
the money-form into the commodity-form; the money-form of capital, its
existence as money-capital, is only a transient phase in this movement;
or, so far as the movement is fluent, money-capital appears only as a medium
of circulation when it serves as a means of purchase; it acts as a paying
medium proper when capitalists buy from one another and therefore only
have to square accounts.

Thirdly, the function of money-capital, whether it is a mere circulating
medium or a paying medium, effects only the replacement of C by L and MP,
i.e., the replacement of the yarn, the commodity which represents the result
of the productive capital (after deducting the surplus-value to be used
as revenue), by its elements of production, in other words, the retransformation
of capital-value from its form as a commodity into the elements that build
this commodity. In the last analysis, the function of money-capital promotes
only the retransformation of commodity-capital into productive capital.

In order that the circuit may be completed normally, C' must be
sold at its value and in its entirety. Furthermore C ; M ; C includes not
merely replacement of one commodity by another, but replacement with value-relations
remaining the same. We assume that this takes place here. As a matter of
fact, however, the value of the means of production vary. It is precisely
capitalist production to which continuous change of value-relations is
peculiar, if only because of the ever changing productivity of labour that
characterises this mode of production. This change in the value of the
elements of production will be discussed later on, [See Section V of Chapter
XV of this volume. ; Ed.] and we merely mention it here. The transformation of the elements of production into commodity-products, of P into C', takes
place in the sphere of production, while the transformation from C' into
P occurs in the sphere of circulation. It is brought about by a simple
metamorphosis of commodities, but its content is a phase in the process
of reproduction, regarded as a whole. C ; M ; C, being a form of circulation of capital, involves a functionally determined exchange of matter. The
transformation C ; M ; C requires further that C should be equal to the
elements of production of the commodity-quantum C', and that these elements
should retain their original value-relations to one another. It is therefore
assumed that the commodities are not only bought at their respective values,
but also do not undergo any change of value during the circular movement.
Otherwise this process cannot run normally.

In M ... M', M represents the original form of the capital-value,
which is discarded only to be resumed. In P ... C' ; M' ; C ... P, M represents a form which is only assumed in the process and which is discarded before
this process is over. The money-form appears here only as a transient independent
form of capital-value. Capital in the form of C' is just as anxious to
assume the money-form as it is to discard it in M', after barely assuming
that garb in order again to transform itself into productive capital. So
long as it remains in the garb of money, it does not function as capital
and its value does not therefore expand. The capital lies fallow. M serves
here as a circulating medium, but as a circulating medium of capital. [Here
Marx made the following note in the manuscript: "Against Tooke." ; Ed.]
The semblance of independence which the money-form of capital-value possesses
in the first form of its circuit (the form of money-capital) disappears
in this second form, which thus is a criticism of Form I and reduces it
to merely a special form. If the second metamorphosis, M ; C, meets with
any obstacles ; for instance if there are no means of production in the
market ; the circuit, the flow of the process of reproduction, is interrupted
quite as much as when capital is held fast in the form of commodity-capital.
But there is this difference: It can remain longer in the money-form than
in the transitory form of commodities. It does not cease to be money, if
it does not perform the functions of money-capital; but it does cease to
be a commodity, or a use-value in general, if it is delayed too long in
the exercise of its function of commodity-capital. Furthermore, in its
money-form it is capable of assuming another form in the place of its original
one of productive capital while it cannot budge at all if held in the form
of C'.

C' ; M' ; C includes acts of circulation only for C' in accordance
with its form, acts which are phrases of its reproduction; but the real
reproduction of C, into which C' transforms itself, is necessary for the
performance of C' ; M' ; C. This however is conditioned on processes of
reproduction which lie outside of the process of reproduction of the individual
capital represented by C'.

In Form I the act M ; C<LMP prepares on the first transformation of money-capital into productive capital; in Form II it prepares the retransformation from commodity-capital into productive
capital; that is to say, so far as the investment of industrial capital
remains the same, retransformation of the commodity-capital into the same
elements of production as those from which it originated. Consequently
here as well as in Form I, the act appears as a preparatory phase of the
process of production, but as a return to it, as a renewal of it, hence
as a precursor of the process of reproduction, hence also of a repetition
of the process of self-expansion of value.

It must be noted once more that M ; L is not a simple exchange
of commodities but the purchase of a commodity, L, which is to serve for
the production of surplus-value, just as M ; MP is only a procedure which
is materially indispensable for the attainment of this end.

With the completion of M ; C<LMP M is reconverted into productive capital, into P, and the circuit begins anew.

The expanded form of P ... C' ; M' ; C ... P is therefore:

The transformation of money-capital into productive capital is the purchase
of commodities for the production of commodities. Consumption falls within
the circuit of capital itself only in so far as it is productive consumption;
its premise is that surplus-value is produced by means of the commodities
so consumed. And this is something very different from production and even
commodity production, which has for its end the existence of the producer.
A replacement ; commodity by commodity ; thus contingent on the production of surplus-value is quite a different matter from the bare exchange of
products brought about merely by means of money. But the economists take
this matter as proof that no overproduction is possible.

Apart from the productive consumption of M, which is transformed
into L and MP, the circuit contains the first member M ; L, which signifies,
from the standpoint of the labourer, L ; M, which equals C ; M. In the
labourer's circulation, L ; M ; C, which includes his consumption, only the first member falls within the circuit of the capital as a result of
M ; L. The second act, M ; C, does not fall within the circulation of individual capital, although it springs from it. But the continuous existence of the
working class is necessary for the capitalist class, and so is therefore
the consumption of the labourer made possible by M ; C.

The only condition which the act C' ; M' stipulates for capital-value
to continue its circuit and for surplus-value to be consumed by the capitalist
is that C' shall have been converted into money, shall have been sold.
Of course, C' is bought only because the article is a use-value, hence
serviceable for consumption of any kind, productive or individual. But
if C' continues to circulate for instance in the hands of the merchant
who bought the yarn, this at first does not in the least affect the continuation
of the circuit of the individual capital which produced the yarn and sold
it to the merchant. The entire process continues and with it the individual
consumption of the capitalist and the labourer made necessary by it. This
point is important in a discussion of crises.

For as soon as C' has been sold, been converted into money, it
can be reconverted into the real factors of the labour process, and thus
of the reproductive process. Whether C' is bought by the ultimate consumer
or by a merchant for resale does not affect the case. The quantity of commodities
created in masses by capitalist production depends on the scale of production
and on the need for constantly expanding this production, and not on a
predestined circle of supply and demand, on wants that have to be satisfied.
Mass production can have no other direct buyer, apart from other industrial
capitalists, than the wholesaler. Within certain limits, the process of
reproduction may take place on the same or on an increased scale even when
the commodities expelled from it did not really enter individual or productive
consumption. The consumption of commodities is not included in the circuit
of the capital from which they originated. For instance, as soon as the
yarn is sold the circuit of the capital value represented by the yarn may
begin anew, regardless of what may next become of the sold yarn. So long
as the product is sold, everything is taking its regular course from the
standpoint of the capitalist producer. The circuit of capital-value he
is identified with is not interrupted. And if this process is expanded
; which includes increased productive consumption of the means of production
; this reproduction of capital may be accompanied by increased individual
consumption (hence demand) on the part of the labourers, since this process
is initiated and effected by productive consumption. Thus the production
of surplus-value, and with it the individual consumption of the capitalist,
may increase, the entire process of reproduction may be in a flourishing
condition, and yet a large part of the commodities may have entered into
consumption only apparently, while in reality they may still remain unsold
in the hands of dealers, may in fact still be lying in the market. Now
one stream of commodities follows another, and finally it is discovered
that the previous streams had been absorbed only apparently by consumption.
The commodity-capitals compete with one another for a place in the market.
Late-comers, to sell at all, sell at lower prices. The former streams have
not yet been disposed of when payment for them falls due. Their owners
must declare their insolvency or sell at any price to meet their
obligations. This sale has nothing whatever to do with the actual state
of the demand. It only concerns the demand for payment, the pressing
necessity of transforming commodities into money. Then a crisis breaks
out. It becomes visible not in the direct decrease of consumer demand,
the demand for individual consumption, but in the decrease of exchanges
of capital for capital, of the reproductive process of capital.

If the commodities MP and L, into which M is transformed to perform
its function of money-capital, of capital-value destined to be retransformed
into productive capital ; if those commodities are to be bought or paid
for on different terms, so that M ; C represents a series of purchases
and payments, then a part of M performs the act M ; C, while another part
persists in the form of money and does not serve to perform simultaneous
or successive acts of M ; C until such time as the conditions of this process
itself may determine. This part is only temporarily withheld from circulation,
in order to go into action, perform its function, in due time. This storing
of it is then in its turn a function determined by its circulation and
intended for circulation. Its existence as a fund for purchase and payment,
the suspension of its movement, the interrupted state of its circulation,
will then constitute a state in which money exercises one of its functions
as money-capital. As money-capital; for in this case the money temporarily
remaining at rest is itself a part of money-capital M (of M' minus m, equal
to M), of that portion of the value of commodity-capital which is equal
to P, to that value of productive capital from which the circuit starts.
On the other hand all money withdrawn from circulation has the form of
a hoard. Money in the form of a hoard therefore becomes here a function
of money-capital, just as in M ; C the function of money as a means of
purchase or payment becomes a function of money-capital. This is so because
capital-value exists here in the form of money, because the money state
here is a state in which industrial capital finds itself at one of its
stages and which is prescribed by the interconnections within the circuit.
At the same time it is here proved true once more that money-capital within
the circuit of industrial capital performs no other functions than those
of money and that these money-functions assume the significance of capital-functions
only by virtue of their interconnections with the other stages of this
circuit.

The representation of M' as a relation of m to M, as a capital-relation,
is not directly a function of money-capital but of commodity-capital C',
which in its turn, as a relation of c and C, expresses but the result of
the process of production, of the self-expansion of capital-value which
took place in it.

If the continuation of the process of circulation meets with obstacles,
so that M must suspend its function M ; C on account of external circumstances,
such as the conditions of the market, etc., and if it therefore remains
for a shorter or longer time in its money-form, then we have once more
money in the form of a hoard, which happens also in simple commodity circulation
whenever the transition from C ; M to M ; C is interrupted by external
circumstances. It is an involuntary formation of a hoard. In the case at
hand money has the form of fallow, latent money-capital. But we will not
discuss this point any further for the present.

In either case however persistence of capital in its money state
appears as the result of interrupted movement, no matter whether this is
expedient or inexpedient, voluntary or involuntary, in accordance with
its functions or contrary to them.