II. The Turnover of the Individual Variable Capital

"Whatever the form of the process of production in a society, it must
be a continuous process, must continue to go periodically through the same
phases... When viewed therefore as a connected whole and as flowing
on with incessant renewal, every social process of production is, at the
same time, a process of reproduction... As a periodic increment of
the capital advanced, or periodic fruit of capital in process, surplus-value
acquires the form of a revenue flowing out of capital." (Buch I, Kap. XXI, pp. 588, 589.) [English edition: pp. 566 and 567. ; Ed.]

In the case of capital A we have 10 five-week turnover periods.
In the first period of turnover &pound;500 of variable capital are advanced;
i.e., &pound;100 are weekly converted into labour-power, so that &pound;500
are spent on labour-power at the end of the first turnover period. These
&pound;500, originally a part of the total capital advanced, have ceased
to be capital. They are paid out in wages. The labourers in their turn
pay them out in the purchase of means of subsistence, consuming means of
subsistence worth &pound;500. A quantity of commodities of that value is
therefore annihilated; (what the labourer may save up in money, etc., is
not capital either). As far as concerns the labourer, this quantity of
commodities has been consumed unproductively, except inasmuch as it preserves
the efficacy of his labour-power, an instrument indispensable to the capitalist.

In the second place however these &pound;500 have been transformed,
for the capitalist, into labour-power of the same value (or price). Labour-power
is consumed by him productively in the labour-process. At the end of 5
weeks a product valued at &pound;1,000 has been created. Half of this,
&pound;500, is the reproduced value of the variable capital expended in
payment of labour-power. The other half, &pound;500, is newly produced
surplus-value. But the 5-weekly labour-power, through exchange for which
a portion of the capital was converted into variable capital, is likewise
expended, consumed, although productively. The labour which was active
yesterday is not the same that is active today. Its value plus that of
surplus-value created by it exists now as the value of a thing distinct
from labour-power, to wit, of a product. But by converting the product
into money, that portion of its value which is equal to the value of variable
capital advanced can once more be exchanged for labour-power and thus again
function as variable capital. The fact that the same workmen, i.e., the
same bearers of labour-power, are given employment not only by the reproduced
capital-value but also by that which has been reconverted into the form
is immaterial. It is possible for the capitalist to hire different workmen
for the second period of turnover.

In actual fact therefore a capital of &pound;5,000, and not of
&pound;500, is expended successively in wages during the ten periods of
turnover of 5 weeks each, and these wages will again be spent by the labourers
to buy means of subsistence. The capital of &pound;5,000 so advanced is
consumed. It ceases to exist. On the other hand labour-power worth &pound;5,000,
not &pound;500, is incorporated successively in the productive process
and reproduces not only its own value of &pound;5,000, but produces over
and above that a surplus-value of &pound;5,000. The variable capital of
&pound;500 advanced during the second period of turnover is not the identical
capital of &pound;500 that had been advanced during the first period of
turnover. That has been consumed, spent in wages. But it is replaced
by new variable capital of &pound;500, which was produced in the first
period of turnover in the form of commodities, and reconverted into money.
This new money-capital of &pound;500 is therefore the money-form of the
quantity of commodities newly produced in the first period of turnover.
The fact that an identical sum of money, &pound;500, is again in the hands
of the capitalist, i.e., apart from the surplus-value, precisely as much
money-capital as he had originally advanced, conceals the circumstance
that he is operating with newly produced capital. (As for the other constituents
of value of the commodity-capital, which replace the constant parts of
capital, their value is not newly produced, but only the form is changed
in which this value exists.)

Let us take the third period of turnover. Here it is evident that
the capital of &pound;500, advanced for a third time, is not an old but
a newly produced capital, for it is the money-form of the quantity of commodities
produced in the second, not the first, period of turnover, i.e., of that
portion of this quantity of commodities whose value is equal to that of
the advanced variable capital. The quantity of commodities produced in
the first period of turnover is sold. A part of its value equal to the
variable portion of the value of the advanced capital was transformed into
the new labour-power of the second period of turnover; it produced a new
quantity of commodities, which were sold in their turn and a portion of
whose value constitutes the capital of &pound;500 advanced in the third
turnover period.

And so forth during the ten periods of turnover. In the course
of these, newly produced quantities of commodities (whose value, inasmuch
as it replaces variable capital, is also newly produced, and does not merely
re-appear as in the case of the constant circulating part of the capital)
are thrown upon the market every 5 weeks, in order to incorporate ever
new labour-power in the process of production.

Therefore what is accomplished by the ten-fold turnover of the
advanced variable capital of &pound;500 is not that this capital of &pound;500
can be productively consumed ten times, or that a variable capital lasting
for 5 weeks can be employed for 50 weeks. Rather, ten times &pound;500
of variable capital is employed in the 50 weeks, and the capital of &pound;500
always lasts only for 5 weeks and must be replaced at the end of the 5
weeks by a newly produced capital of &pound;500. This applies equally to
capitals A and B. But at this point the difference begins.

At the end of the first period of 5 weeks a variable capital of
&pound;500 has been advanced and expended by B as well as A. Both A and
B have converted its value into labour-power and replaced it by that portion
of the value of the product newly created by this labour-power which is
equal to the value of the advanced variable capital of &pound;500. For
both B and A the labour-power has not only replaced the value of the expended
variable capital of &pound;500 by a new value of the same amount, but also
added a surplus-value which, according to our assumption, is of the same
magnitude.

But in the case of B the value-product, which replaces the advanced
variable capital and adds to it a surplus-value, is not in the form in
which it can function anew as productive, or variable, capital. It is in
such a form in the case of A. And up to the end of the year B does not
possess the variable capital expended in the first 5 and every subsequent
5 weeks (although it has been replaced by newly produced value plus surplus-value)
in the form in which it can again function as productive, or variable,
capital. True, its value is replaced by new value, hence renewed,
but the form of its value (in this case the absolute form of value,
its money-form) is not renewed.

For the second period of 5 weeks (and thus for every succeeding
5 weeks of the year) another &pound;500 must again be available, the same
as for the first period. Hence, regardless of credit conditions, &pound;5,000
must be available at the beginning of the year as a latent advanced money-capital,
although they are really expended, turned into labour-power, only gradually,
in the course of the year.

But because in the case of A the circuit, the turnover of the
advanced capital, is consummated, the replacement value after the lapse
of the first 5 weeks is already in the form in which it can set new labour-power
in motion for a term of 5 weeks ; in its original form, the money-form.

In cases of both A and B new labour-power is consumed in the second
5-week period and a new capital of &pound;500 is spent in payment of this
labour-power. The means of subsistence of the labourers, paid with the
first &pound;500, are gone; at all events their value has vanished from
the hands of the capitalist. With the second &pound;500 new labour-power
is bought, new means of subsistence withdrawn from the market. In short,
it is a new capital of &pound;500 that is being expended, not the old.
But in the case of A this new capital of &pound;500 is the money-form of
the newly produced substitute for the value of the formerly expended &pound;500,
while in the case of B, this substitute is in a form in which it cannot
function as variable capital. It is there, but not in the form of variable
capital. For the continuation of the process of production for the next
5 weeks an additional capital of &pound;500 must therefore be available
and advanced in the here indispensable form of money. Thus, during 50 weeks,
both A and B expend an equal amount of variable capital, pay for and consume
an equal quantity of labour-power. Only, B must pay for it with an advanced
capital equal to its total value of &pound;5,000, while A pays for it successively
with the ever renewed money-form of the value-substitute, produced every
5 weeks, for the capital of &pound;500 advanced for every 5 weeks, i.e.,
never more than that advanced for the first 5 weeks, viz., &pound;500.
These &pound;500 last for the entire year. It is therefore clear that,
the degree of exploitation of labour and the real rate of surplus-value
being the same, the annual rates (of surplus-value) of A and B must be
inversely proportional to the magnitudes of the variable money-capitals
which have to be advanced in order to set in motion the same amount of
labour-power during the year.

A: 5,000s/500v = 1,000%; B: 5,000s/5,000v = 100%.

But 500v : 5,000v = 1 : 10 = 100% : 1,000%.

The difference is due to the difference in the periods of turnover, i.e.,
the periods in which the value-substitute of the variable capital employed
for a definite time can function anew as capital, hence as new capital.
In the case of B as well as A, there is the same replacement of value for
the variable capital employed during the same periods. There is also the
same increment of surplus-value during the same periods. But in the case
of B, while every 5 weeks there is a replacement of the value of &pound;500
and a surplus-value of &pound;500, this value-substitute does not constitute
new capital, because it does not exist in the form of money. In the case
of A the old capital-value is not only replaced by a new one, but is rehabilitated
in its money-form, hence replaced as a new capital capable of performing
its function.

The conversion, sooner or later, of the value-substitute into
money, and thus into the form in which variable capital is advanced, is
obviously an immaterial circumstance, so far as the production of surplus-value
itself is concerned. This production depends on the magnitude of variable
capital employed and the degree of exploitation of labour. But that circumstance
modifies the magnitude of the money-capital which must be advanced in order
to set a definite quantum of labour-power in motion during the year, and
therefore it determines the annual rate of surplus-value.