VII. CONCLUSION

We may now say a few words to sum up. The law of contradiction in things,
that is, the law of the unity of opposites, is the fundamental law of nature
and of society and therefore also the fundamental law of thought. It stands
opposed to the metaphysical world outlook. It represents a great revolution
in the history of human knowledge. According to dialectical materialism,
contradiction is present in all processes of objectively existing things
and of subjective thought and permeates all these processes from beginning
to end; this is the universality and absoluteness of contradiction. Each
contradiction and each of its aspects have their respective characteristics;
this is the particularity and relativity of contradiction. In given conditions,
opposites possess identity, and consequently can coexist in a single entity
and can transform themselves into each other; this again is the particularity
and relativity of contradiction. But the struggle of opposites is ceaseless,
it goes on both when the opposites are coexisting and when they are transforming
themselves into each other, and becomes especially conspicuous when they
are transforming themselves into one another; this again is the universality
and absoluteness of contradiction. In studying the particularity and relativity
of contradiction, we must give attention to the distinction between the principal
contradiction and the non-principal contradictions and to the distinction
between the principal aspect and the non-principal aspect of a contradiction;
in studying the universality of contradiction and the struggle of opposites
in contradiction, we must give attention to the distinction between the different
forms of struggle. Otherwise we shall make mistakes. If, through study, we
achieve a real understanding of the essentials explained above, we shall
be able to demolish dogmatist ideas which are contrary to the basic principles
of Marxism-Leninism and detrimental to our revolutionary cause, and our comrades
with practical experience will be able to organize their experience into
principles and avoid repeating empiricist errors. These are a few simple
conclusions from our study of the law of contradiction.

NOTES

1. V. I. Lenin, "Conspectus of Hegel's Lectures on the
History of Philosophy" Collected Works, Russ. ed., Moscow, 1958, Vol.
XXXVIII, p. 249.

2. In his essay "On the Question of Dialectics", Lenin
said, "The splitting in two of a single whole and the cognition of its
contradictory parts (see the quotation from Philo on Heraclitus at the beginning
of Section 3 'On Cognition' in Lassalle's book on Heraclitus) is the essence
(one of the 'essentials', one of the principal, if not the principal,
characteristics or features) of dialectics." (Collected Works, Russ.
ed., Moscow, 1958, Vol. XXXVIII, p. 357.) In his "Conspectus of Hegel's The
Science of Logic", he said, "In brief, dialectics can be defined as the
doctrine of the unity of opposites. This grasps the kernel of dialectics,
but it requires explanations and development." (Ibid., p. 215.)

3. V. I. Lenin, "On the Question of Dialectics", Collected
Works, Russ. ed., Moscow, 1958, Vol. XXXVIII, p. 358.

4. A saying of Tung Chung-shu (179-104 B.C.), a well-known
exponent of Confucianism in the Han Dynasty.

5. Frederick Engels, "Dialectics. Quantity and Quality",
Anti-Duhring, Eng. ed., FLPH, Moscow, 1959, p. 166.

6. V. I. Lenin, "On the Question of Dialectics", Collected
Works, Russ. ed., Moscow, 1958, Vol. XXXVIII, pp. 357-58.

7. Frederick Engels, op. cit., pp. 166-67.

8. V. I. Lenin, "On the Question of Dialectics", Collected
Works, Russ. ed., Moscow, 1958, Vol. XXXVIII, p. 357.

9. Ibid., pp. 358-59.

10. See "Problems of Strategy in China's Revolutionary
War", Note 10, p. 251 of this volume.

11. See ibid., Note :, p. 249 of this volume.

12. Wei Cheng (A.D. 580-643) was a statesman and historian
of the Tang Dynasty.

13. Shui Hu Chuan (Heroes of the Marshes),
a famous 14th century Chinese novel, describes a peasant war towards the
end of the Northern Sung Dynasty. Chu Village was in the vicinity of Liangshanpo,
where Sung Chiang, leader of the peasant uprising and hero of the novel,
established his base. Chu Chao-feng, the head of this village, was a despotic
landlord.

14. V. I. Lenin, "Once Again on the Trade Unions, the
Present Situation and the Mistakes of Trotsky and Bukharin", Selected
Works, Eng. ed., International Publishers, New York, 1943, Vol. IX, p. 66.

15. V. I. Lenin, "What Is to Be Done?", Collected Works,
Eng. ed., FLPH, Moscow, 1961, Vol. V, p. 369.

16. V. I. Lenin, "Conspectus of Hegel's The Science
of Logic", Collected Works, Russ. ed., Moscow, 1958, Vol. XXXVIII, pp.
97-98.

17. Shan Hai Chug (Book of Mountains and Seas)
was written in the era of the Warring States (403-221 B.C.). In one of its
fables Kua Fu, a superman, pursued and overtook the sun. But he died of thirst,
whereupon his staff was transformed into the forest of Teng.

18. Yi is one of the legendary heroes of ancient China,
famous for his archery. According to a legend in Huai Nan Tzu, compiled
in the 2nd century B.C., there were ten suns in the sky in the days of Emperor
Yao. To put an end to the damage to vegetation caused by these scorching
suns, Emperor Yao ordered Yi to shoot them down. In another legend recorded
by Wang Yi (2nd century A.D.), the archer is said to have shot down nine
of the ten suns.

19. Hsi Yu Chi (Pilgrimage to the West) is a 16th century
novel, the hero of which is the monkey god Sun Wu-kung. He could miraculously
change at will into seventy-two different shapes, such as a bird, a tree
and a stone.

20. The Strange Tales of Liao Chai, written by
Pu Sung-ling in the 17th century, is a well-known collection of 431 tales,
mostly about ghosts and fox spirits.

21. Karl Marx, "Introduction to the Critique of Political
Economy", A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, Eng.
ed., Chicago, 1904, pp. 310-11.

22. V. I. Lenin, "On the Question of Dialectics",
Collected Works, Russ. ed., Moscow, 1958, Vol. XXXVIII, p. 358.

23. The saying "Things that oppose each other also complement
each other" first appeared in the History of the Earlier Han Dynasty by
Pan Ku, a celebrated historian in the 1st century A.D. It has long been a
popular saying.

24. V. I. Lenin, "On the Question of Dialectics",
Collected Works, Russ. ed., Moscow, 1958, Vol. XXXVIII, p. 358.

25. V. I. Lenin, "Remarks on N. I. Bukharin's Economics
of the Transitional Period" Selected Works, Russ. ed.,
Moscow-Leningrad, 1931, Vol. XI, p. 357.

Transcription by the Maoist Documentation Project. 

Transcription and HTML revised by Marxists.org in 2004, 2019, and 2020.

Selected Works of Mao Tse-tung