5. Recapitulation

The absurd formula that the three revenues, wages, profit and rent,
form the three "component parts" of the value of commodities
originates with Adam Smith from the more plausible idea that the value
of commodities "resolves itself" into these three component parts. This is likewise incorrect, even granted that the value of
commodities is divisible only into an equivalent of the consumed
labour-power and the surplus-value created by it. But the mistake
rests here too on a deeper, a true foundation. Capitalist production
is based on the fact that the productive labourer sells his own
labour-power, as his commodity, to the capitalist, in whose hands it
then functions merely as an element of his productive capital. This
transaction, which pertains to circulation ; the sale and purchase of
labour-power ; not only inaugurates the process of production, but
also determines implicitly its specific character. The production of a
use-value, and even that of a commodity (for this can be carried on
also by independent productive labourers), is here only a means of
producing absolute and relative surplus-value for a capitalist. For
this reason we have seen in the analysis of the process of production
that the production of absolute and relative surplus-value determines
1) the duration of the daily labour-process and 2) the entire social
and technical configuration of the capitalist process of production.
Within this process there is realised the distinction between the mere
conservation of value (of the constant capital-value), the actual
reproduction of advanced value (equivalent of labour-power), and the
production of surplus-value, i.e., of value for which the capitalist
has neither advanced an equivalent previously nor will advance one
post festum.

The appropriation of surplus-value ; a value in excess of the
equivalent of the value advanced by the capitalist ; although
inaugurated by the purchase and sale of labour-power, is an act
performed within the process of production itself, and forms an
essential element of it.

The introductory act, which constitutes an act of circulation ; the
purchase and sale of labour-power ; itself rests on a distribution of
the elements of production which preceded and presupposed the
distribution of the social products, namely on the separation of
labour-power as a commodity of the labourer from the means of
production as the property of non-labourers.

However this appropriation of surplus-value, or this separation of the
production of value into a reproduction of advanced value and a
production of new value (surplus-value) which does not replace any
equivalent, does not alter in any way the substance of value itself or
the nature of the production of value. The substance of value is and
remains nothing but expended labour-power ; labour independent of the
specific, useful character of this expenditure. A serf for instance
expends his labour-power for six days, labours for six days, and the
fact of this expenditure as such is not altered by the circumstance
that he may be working three days for himself, on his own field, and
three days for his lord, on the field of the latter. Both his
voluntary labour for himself and his forced labour for his lord are
equally labour; so far as this labour is considered with reference to
the values, or to the useful articles created by it, there is no
difference in his six days of labour. The difference refers merely to
the different conditions by which the expenditure of his labour-power
during both halves of his labour-time of six days is called forth. The
same applies to the necessary and surplus-labour of the wage-labourer.

The process of production expires in the commodity. The fact that
labour-power was expended in its fabrication now appears as a
material property of the commodity, as the property of possessing
value. The magnitude of this value is measured by the amount of labour
expended; the value of a commodity resolves itself into nothing else
besides and is not composed of anything else. If I have drawn a
straight line of definite length, I have, to start with,
"produced" a straight line (true, only symbolically, as I know
beforehand) by resort to the art of drawing, which is practised in
accordance with certain rules (laws) independent of myself. If I
divide this line into three sections (which may correspond to a
certain problem), every one of these sections remains a straight line,
and the entire line, whose sections they are, does not resolve itself
by this division into anything different from a straight line, for
instance into some kind of curve. Neither can I divide a line of a
given length in such a way that the sum of its parts is greater than
the undivided line itself; hence the length of the undivided line is
not determined by any arbitrarily fixed lengths of its parts. Vice
versa, the relative lengths of these parts are limited from the outset
by the size of the line whose parts they are.

In this a commodity produced by a capitalist does not differ in any
way from that produced by an independent labourer or by communities of
working-people or by slaves. But in the present case the entire
product of labour, as well as its entire value, belongs to the
capitalist. Like every other producer he has to convert his commodity
by sale into money before he can manipulate it further; he must
convert it into the form of the universal equivalent.

Let us examine the commodity-product before it is converted into
money. It belongs wholly to the capitalist. On the other hand as a
useful product of labour, a use-value, it is entirely the product of a
past labour-process. Not so its value. One portion of this value is
but the value of the means of production expended in the production of
this commodity and re-appearing in a new form. This value has not been
produced during the process of production of this commodity, for the
means of production possessed this value before the process of
production, independently of it; they entered into this process as the
vehicles of this value; it is only its form of appearance that has
been renewed and altered. This portion of the value of the commodity
constitutes for the capitalist an equivalent of the portion of the
constant capital-value advanced and consumed in the production of the
commodity. It existed previously in the form of means of production;
it exists now as a component part of the value of the newly produced
commodity. As soon as this commodity has been turned into money, the
value now existing in the form of money must be reconverted into means
of production, into its original form determined by the process of
production and its function in it. Nothing is altered in the character
of the value of a commodity by the function of this value as capital.

A second portion of the value of a commodity is the value of the
labour-power which the wage-worker sells to the capitalist. It is
determined, the same as that of the means of production, independently
of the process of production into which labour-power is to enter, and
it is fixed in an act of circulation, the purchase and sale of
labour-power, before the latter enters the process of production. By
means of his function ; the expenditure of labour-power ; the
wage-labourer produces a commodity-value equal to the value which the
capitalist has to pay him for the use of his labour-power. He gives
this value to the capitalist in the form of a commodity and is paid
for it by him in money. That this portion of the commodity-value is
for the capitalist but an equivalent for the variable capital which he
has to advance in wages does not alter in any way the fact that it is
a commodity-value newly created during the process of production and
consisting of nothing but what surplus-value consists of, namely, past
expenditure of labour-power. Nor is this truth affected by the fact
that the value of the labour-power paid by the capitalist to the
labourer in the form of wages and assumes the form of a revenue for
the labourer, and that not only labour-power is continually reproduced
thereby but also the class of wage-labourers as such, and thus the
basis of the entire capitalist production.

However, the sum of these two portions of value does not comprise the
whole of commodity-value. There remains an excess over both of
them ; the surplus-value. This, like the portion of value which
replaces the variable capital advanced in wages, is a value newly
created by the labourer during the process of production ; congealed
labour. But it does not cost the owner of the entire product, the
capitalist, anything. This circumstance actually permits the
capitalist to consume the surplus-value entirely as revenue, unless he
has to surrender parts of it to other participants ; such as
ground-rent to the landlord, in which case such portions constitute a
revenue of such third persons. This same circumstance was the
compelling motive that induced our capitalist to engage at all in the
manufacture of commodities. But neither his original benevolent
intention of snatching surplus-value, nor its subsequent expenditure
as revenue by him or others affects the surplus-value as such. They do
not impair the fact that it is congealed unpaid labour, nor the
magnitude of this surplus-value, which is determined by entirely
different conditions.

However, if Adam Smith wanted to occupy himself, as he did, with the
role of the various parts of this value in the total process of
reproduction, even while he was investigating the value of
commodities, it would be evident that while some particular parts
function as revenue, others function just as continually as
capital ; and consequently, according to his logic, should have been
designated as constituent parts of the commodity-value, or parts into
which this value resolves itself.

Adam Smith identifies the production of commodities in general with
capitalist commodity production; the means of production are to him
from the outset "capital," labour is from the outset wage-labour, and therefore

"the number of useful and productive
labourers ... is everywhere in proportion to the quantity of capital
stock which employed in setting them to work." (Introduction, p.
12.)

In short, the various factors of the labour-process ; both
objective and personal ; appear from the first with the masks
characteristic of the period of capitalist production. The analysis of
the value of commodities therefore coincides directly with the
consideration of the extent to which this value is on the one hand a
mere equivalent of capital laid out, and on the other, to what extent
it forms "free" value, value not replacing any advanced
capital-value, or surplus-value. Compared from this point of view,
parts of commodity-value thus transform themselves imperceptibly into
its independent "component parts," and finally into the
"sources of all value." A further conclusion is that
commodity-value is composed of, or "resolves itself" into,
revenues of various kinds, so that the revenues do not consist of
commodity-values but the commodity-value consists of "revenues."
As little, however, as the nature of a commodity-value as such, or of
money as such, is changed through their functioning as capital-value,
just so little is the nature of a commodity-value as capital-value,
just so little is the nature of a commodity-value changed on account
of its functioning later as a revenue for some particular person. The
commodity with which Adam Smith has to deal is from the outset
commodity-capital (which comprises surplus-value in addition to the
capital-value consumed in the production of the commodity); it is
therefore a commodity produced capitalistically, the result of the
capitalist process of production. It would have been necessary, then,
to analyse first this process, and also the process of self-expansion
and of the formation of value, which it includes. Since this process
is in its turn premised by the circulation of commodities, its
description requires also a preliminary and independent analysis of
the commodity. However, even where Adam Smith at times hits
"esoterically" upon the correct thing he always takes into
consideration the formation of value only as incidental to the
analysis of commodities, i.e., to the analysis of commodity-capital.