II. THE UNIVERSALITY OF CONTRADICTION

For convenience of exposition, I shall deal first with the universality of
contradiction and then proceed to the particularity of contradiction. The
reason is that the universality of contradiction can be explained more briefly,
for it has been widely recognized ever since the materialist-dialectical
world outlook was discovered and materialist dialectics applied with outstanding
success to analysing many aspects of human history and natural history and
to changing many aspects of society and nature (as in the Soviet Union) by
the great creators and continuers of Marxism; Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin;
whereas the particularity of contradiction is still not dearly understood
by many comrades, and especially by the dogmatists. They do not understand
that it is precisely in the particularity of contradiction that the universality
of contradiction resides. Nor do they understand how important is the study
of the particularity of contradiction in the concrete things confronting
us for guiding the course of revolutionary practice. Therefore, it is necessary
to stress the study of the particularity of contradiction and to explain
it at adequate length. For this reason, in our analysis of the law of
contradiction in things, we shall first analyse the universality of
contradiction, then place special stress on analysing the particularity of
contradiction, and finally return to the universality of contradiction.

The universality or absoluteness of contradiction has a twofold meaning.
One is that contradiction exists in the process of development of all things,
and the other is that in the process of development of each thing a movement
of opposites exists from beginning to end.

Engels said, "Motion itself is a contradiction." [5] Lenin
defined the law of the unity of opposites as "the recognition (discovery)
of the contradictory, mutually exclusive, opposite tendencies in all
phenomena and processes of nature (including mind and society)".
[6] Are these ideas correct? Yes, they are. The
interdependence of the contradictory aspects present in all things and the
struggle between these aspects determine the life of all things and push
their development forward. There is nothing that does not contain contradiction;
without contradiction nothing would exist.

Contradiction is the basis of the simple forms of motion (for instance,
mechanical motion) and still more so of the complex forms of motion.

Engels explained the universality of contradiction as follows:

 If simple mechanical change of place contains a contradiction, this is even
 more true of the higher forms of motion of matter, and especially of organic
 life and its development. ... life consists precisely and primarily in this; that
 a being is at each moment itself and yet something else. Life is therefore
 also a contradiction which is present in things and processes themselves,
 and which constantly originates and resolves itself; and as soon as the
 contradiction ceases, life, too, comes to an end, and death steps in. We
 likewise saw that also in the sphere of thought we could not escape
 contradictions, and that for example the contradiction between man's inherently
 unlimited capacity for knowledge and its actual presence only in men who
 are externally limited and possess limited cognition finds its solution in
 what is; at least practically, for us; an endless succession of generations,
 in infinite progress.

 ... one of the basic principles of higher mathematics is the contradiction
 that in certain circumstances straight lines and curves may be the same....

 But even lower mathematics teems with contradictions. [7]

Lenin illustrated the universality of contradiction as follows:

 In mathematics: + and - . Differential and integral.

 In mechanics: action and reaction.

 In physics: positive and negative electricity.

 In chemistry: the combination and dissociation of atoms.

 In social science: the class struggle. [8]

In war, offence and defence, advance and retreat, victory and defeat are
all mutually contradictory phenomena. One cannot exist without the other.
The two aspects are at once in conflict and in interdependence, and
this constitutes the totality of a war, pushes its development forward and
solves its problems.

Every difference in men's concepts should be regarded as reflecting an objective
contradiction. Objective contradictions are reflected in subjective thinking,
and this process constitutes the contradictory movement of concepts, pushes
forward the development of thought, and ceaselessly solves problems in man's
thinking.

Opposition and struggle between ideas of different kinds constantly occur
within the Party; this is a reflection within the Party of contradictions
between classes and between the new and the old in society. If there were
no contradictions in the Party and no ideological struggles to resolve them,
the Party's life would come to an end.

Thus it is already clear that contradiction exists universally and in all
processes, whether in the simple or in the complex forms of motion, whether
in objective phenomena or ideological phenomena. But does contradiction also
exist at the initial stage of each process?

Is there a movement of opposites from beginning to end in the process of
development of every single thing?

As can be seen from the articles written by Soviet philosophers criticizing
it, the Deborin school maintains that contradiction appears not at the inception
of a process but only when it has developed to a certain stage. If this were
the case, then the cause of the development of the process before that stage
would be external and not internal. Deborin thus reverts to the metaphysical
theories of external causality and of mechanism. Applying this view in the
analysis of concrete problems, the Deborin school sees only differences but
not contradictions between the kulaks and the peasants in general under existing
conditions in the Soviet Union, thus entirely agreeing with Bukharin. In
analysing the French Revolution, it holds that before the Revolution there
were likewise only differences but not contradictions within the Third Estate,
which was composed of the workers, the peasants and the bourgeoisie. These
views of the Deborin school are anti-Marxist. This school does not understand
that each and every difference already contains contradiction and that difference
itself is contradiction. Labour and capital have been in contradiction ever
since the two classes came into being, only at first the contradiction had
not yet become intense. Even under the social conditions existing in the
Soviet Union, there is a difference between workers and peasants and this
very difference is a contradiction, although, unlike the contradiction between
labour and capital, it will not become intensified into antagonism or assume
the form of class struggle; the workers and the peasants have established
a firm alliance in the course of socialist construction and are gradually
resolving this contradiction in the course of the advance from socialism
to communism. The question is one of different kinds of contradiction, not
of the presence or absence of contradiction. Contradiction is universal and
absolute, it is present in the process of development of all things and permeates
every process from beginning to end.

What is meant by the emergence of a new process? The old unity with its
constituent opposites yields to a new unity with its constituent opposites,
whereupon a new process emerges to replace the old. The old process ends
and the new one begins. The new process contains new contradictions and begins
its own history of the development of contradictions.

As Lenin pointed out, Marx in his Capital gave a model analysis of
this movement of opposites which runs through the process of development
of things from beginning to end. This is the method that must be employed
in studying the development of all things. Lenin, too, employed this method
correctly and adhered to it in all his writings.

In his Capital, Marx first analyses the simplest, most ordinary and
fundamental, most common and everyday relation of bourgeois (commodity)
society, a relation encountered billions of times, viz. the exchange of
commodities. In this very simple phenomenon (in this "cell" of bourgeois
society) analysis reveals all the contradictions (or the germs of
all the contradictions) of modern society. The subsequent exposition
shows us the development (both growth and movement) of these
contradictions and of this society in the [summation] of its individual parts,
from its beginning to its end.

Lenin added, "Such must also be the method of exposition (or study) of dialectics
in general." [9]

Chinese Communists must learn this method; only then will they be able correctly
to analyse the history and the present state of the Chinese revolution and
infer its future.