(c) Money

Whether a product is fabricated as a commodity or not, it is always a material
form of wealth, a use-value intended for individual or productive consumption.
Its value as a commodity is ideally expressed in its price, which does
not change its actual use-form in the least. But the fact that certain
commodities like gold and silver function as money and as such reside exclusively
in the process of circulation (even in the form of hoards, reserve funds,
etc., they remain in the sphere of circulation, although latently) is a
pure product of the particular social form of the process of production,
the process of production of commodities. Since under capitalist production
products assume the general form of commodities, and the overwhelming mass
of products is created as commodities and must therefore assume the form
of money, and since the vast bulk of commodities, the part of social wealth
functioning as commodities, grows continually, it follows that the quantity
of gold and silver functioning as means of circulation, paying medium,
reserve fund, etc., likewise increases. These commodities performing the
function of money enter into neither individual nor productive consumption.
They represent social labour in a fixed form in which it serves as a mere
circulation machine. Besides the fact that a part of social wealth has
been condemned to assume this unproductive form, the wearing down of the
money demands its constant replacement, or the conversion of more social
labour, in the form of products, into more gold and silver. These replacement
costs are considerable in capitalistically developed nations, because in
general the portion of wealth tied up in the form of money is tremendous.
Gold and silver as money-commodities mean circulation costs to society
which arise solely out of the social form of production. They are faux
frais of commodity production in general, and they increase with the
development of this production, especially of capitalist production. They
represent a part of the social wealth that must be sacrificed to the process
of circulation.[13]