VI. THE PLACE OF ANTAGONISM IN CONTRADICTION

The question of the struggle of opposites includes the question of what is
antagonism. Our answer is that antagonism is one form, but not the only form,
of the struggle of opposites.

In human history, antagonism between classes exists as a particular manifestation
of the struggle of opposites. Consider the contradiction between the exploiting
and the exploited classes. Such contradictory classes coexist for a long
time in the same society, be it slave society, feudal society or capitalist
society, and they struggle with each other; but it is not until the contradiction
between the two classes develops to a certain stage that it assumes the form
of open antagonism and develops into revolution. The same holds for the
transformation of peace into war in class society.

Before it explodes, a bomb is a single entity in which opposites coexist
in given conditions. The explosion takes place only when a new condition,
ignition, is present. An analogous situation arises in all those natural
phenomena which finally assume the form of open conflict to resolve old
contradictions and produce new things.

It is highly important to grasp this fact. It enables us to understand that
revolutions and revolutionary wars are inevitable in class society and that
without them, it is impossible to accomplish any leap in social development
and to overthrow the reactionary ruling classes and therefore impossible
for the people to win political power. Communists must expose the deceitful
propaganda of the reactionaries, such as the assertion that social revolution
is unnecessary and impossible. They must firmly uphold the Marxist-Leninist
theory of social revolution and enable the people to understand that social
revolution is not only entirely necessary but also entirely practicable,
and that the whole history of mankind and the triumph of the Soviet Union
have confirmed this scientific truth.

However, we must make a concrete study of the circumstances of each specific
struggle of opposites and should not arbitrarily apply the formula discussed
above to everything. Contradiction and struggle are universal and absolute,
but the methods of resolving contradictions, that is, the forms of struggle,
differ according to the differences in the nature of the contradictions.
Some contradictions are characterized by open antagonism, others are not.
In accordance with the concrete development of things, some contradictions
which were originally non-antagonistic develop into antagonistic ones, while
others which were originally antagonistic develop into non-antagonistic ones.

As already mentioned, so long as classes exist, contradictions between correct
and incorrect ideas in the Communist Party are reflections within the Party
of class contradictions. At first, with regard to certain issues, such
contradictions may not manifest themselves as antagonistic. But with the
development of the class struggle, they may grow and become antagonistic.
The history of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union shows us that the
contradictions between the correct thinking of Lenin and Stalin and the
fallacious thinking of Trotsky, Bukharin and others did not at first manifest
themselves in an antagonistic form, but that later they did develop into
antagonism. There are similar cases in the history of the Chinese Communist
Party. At first the contradictions between the correct thinking of many of
our Party comrades and the fallacious thinking of Chen Tu-hsiu, Chang Kuo-tao
and others also did not manifest themselves in an antagonistic form, but
later they did develop into antagonism. At present the contradiction between
correct and incorrect thinking in our Party does not manifest itself in an
antagonistic form, and if comrades who have committed mistakes can correct
them, it will not develop into antagonism. Therefore, the Party must on the
one hand wage a serious struggle against erroneous thinking, and on the other
give the comrades who have committed errors ample opportunity to wake up.
This being the case, excessive struggle is obviously inappropriate. But if
the people who have committed errors persist in them and aggravate them,
there is the possibility that this contradiction will develop into antagonism.

Economically, the contradiction between town and country is an extremely
antagonistic one both in capitalist society, where under the rule of the
bourgeoisie the towns ruthlessly plunder the countryside, and in the Kuomintang
areas in China, where under the rule of foreign imperialism and the Chinese
big comprador bourgeoisie the towns most rapaciously plunder the countryside.
But in a socialist country and in our revolutionary base areas, this antagonistic
contradiction has changed into one that is non-antagonistic; and when communist
society is reached it will be abolished.

Lenin said, "Antagonism and contradiction are not at all one and the same.
Under socialism, the first will disappear, the second will remain."
[25] That is to say, antagonism is one form, but not
the only form, of the struggle of opposites; the formula of antagonism cannot
be arbitrarily applied everywhere.