V. THE IDENTITY AND STRUGGLE OF THE ASPECTS OF A CONTRADICTION

When we understand the universality and the particularity of contradiction,
we must proceed to study the problem of the identity and struggle of the
aspects of a contradiction.

Identity, unity, coincidence, interpenetration, interpermeation, interdependence
(or mutual dependence for existence), interconnection or mutual co-operation; all
these different terms mean the same thing and refer to the following
two points: first, the existence of each of the two aspects of a contradiction
in the process of the development of a thing presupposes the existence of
the other aspect, and both aspects coexist in a single entity; second, in
given conditions, each of the two contradictory aspects transforms itself
into its opposite. This is the meaning of identity.

Lenin said:

 Dialectics is the teaching which shows how opposites can be
 and how they happen to be (how they become) identical; under what
 conditions they are identical, transforming themselves into one another,; why
 the human mind should take these opposites not as dead, rigid, but as living,
 conditional, mobile, transforming themselves into one another.
 [16]

What does this passage mean?

The contradictory aspects in every process exclude each other, struggle with
each other and are in opposition to each other. Without exception, they are
contained in the process of development of all things and in all human
thought. A simple process contains only a single pair of opposites, while
a complex process contains more. And in turn, the pairs of opposites are
in contradiction to one another.

That is how all things in the objective world and all human thought are
constituted and how they are set in motion.

This being so, there is an utter lack of identity or unity. How then can
one speak of identity or unity?

The fact is that no contradictory aspect can exist in isolation. Without
its opposite aspect, each loses the condition for its existence. Just think,
can any one contradictory aspect of a thing or of a concept in the human
mind exist independently? Without life, there would be no death; without
death, there would be no life. Without "above", there would be no "below"
without "below", there would be no "above". Without misfortune, there would
be no good fortune; without good fortune, there would be no misfortune. Without
facility, there would be no difficulty, without difficulty, there would be
no facility. Without landlords, there would be no tenant-peasants; without
tenant-peasants, there would be no landlords. Without the bourgeoisie, there
would be no proletariat; without the proletariat, there would be no bourgeoisie.
Without imperialist oppression of nations, there would be no colonies or
semi-colonies; without colonies or semicolonies, there would be no imperialist
oppression of nations. It is so with all opposites; in given conditions,
on the one hand they are opposed to each other, and on the other they are
interconnected, interpenetrating, interpermeating and interdependent, and
this character is described as identity. In given conditions, all contradictory
aspects possess the character of non-identity and hence are described as
being in contradiction. But they also possess the character of identity and
hence are interconnected. This is what Lenin means when he says that dialectics
studies "how opposites can be ... identical". How then can
they be identical? Because each is the condition for the other's existence.
This is the first meaning of identity.

But is it enough to say merely that each of the contradictory aspects is
the condition for the other's existence, that there is identity between them
and that consequently they can coexist in a single entity? No, it is not.
The matter does not end with their dependence on each other for their existence;
what is more important is their transformation into each other. That is to
say, in given conditions, each of the contradictory aspects within a thing
transforms itself into its opposite, changes its position to that of its
opposite. This is the second meaning of the identity of contradiction.

Why is there identity here, too? You see, by means of revolution the
proletariat, at one time the ruled, is transformed into the ruler, while
the bourgeoisie, the erstwhile ruler, is transformed into the ruled and changes
its position to that originally occupied by its opposite. This has already
taken place in the Soviet Union, as it will take place throughout the world.
If there were no interconnection and identity of opposites in given conditions,
how could such a change take place?

The Kuomintang, which played a certain positive role at a certain stage in
modern Chinese history, became a counter-revolutionary party after 1927 because
of its inherent class nature and because of imperialist blandishments (these
being the conditions); but it has been compelled to agree to resist Japan
because of the sharpening of the contradiction between China and Japan and
because of the Communist Party's policy of the united front (these being
the conditions). Things in contradiction change into one another, and herein
lies a definite identity.

Our agrarian revolution has been a process in which the landlord class owning
the land is transformed into a class that has lost its land, while the peasants
who once lost their land are transformed into small holders who have acquired
land, and it will be such a process once again. In given conditions having
and not having, acquiring and losing, are interconnected; there is identity
of the two sides. Under socialism, private peasant ownership is transformed
into the public ownership of socialist agriculture; this has already taken
place in the Soviet Union, as it will take place everywhere else. There is
a bridge leading from private property to public property, which in philosophy
is called identity, or transformation into each other, or interpenetration.

To consolidate the dictatorship of the proletariat or the dictatorship of
the people is in fact to prepare the conditions for abolishing this dictatorship
and advancing to the higher stage when all state systems are eliminated.
To establish and build the Communist Party is in fact to prepare the conditions
for the elimination of the Communist Party and all political parties. To
build a revolutionary army under the leadership of the Communist Party and
to carry on revolutionary war is in fact to prepare the conditions for the
permanent elimination of war. These opposites are at the same time complementary.

War and peace, as everybody knows, transform themselves into each other.
War is transformed into peace; for instance, the First World War was transformed
into the post-war peace, and the civil war in China has now stopped, giving
place to internal peace. Peace is transformed into war; for instance, the
Kuomintang-Communist co-operation was transformed into war in 1927, and today's
situation of world peace may be transformed into a second world war. Why
is this so? Because in class society such contradictory things as war and
peace have an identity in given conditions.

All contradictory things are interconnected; not only do they coexist in
a single entity in given conditions, but in other given conditions, they
also transform themselves into each other. This is the full meaning of the
identity of opposites. This is what Lenin meant when he discussed "how they
happen to be (how they become) identical; under what conditions they
are identical, transforming themselves into one another".

Why is it that "the human mind should take these opposites not as dead, rigid,
but as living, conditional, mobile, transforming themselves into one another"?
Because that is just how things are in objective reality. The fact is that
the unity or identity of opposites in objective things is not dead or rigid,
but is living, conditional, mobile, temporary and relative; in given conditions,
every contradictory aspect transforms itself into its opposite. Reflected
in man's thinking, this becomes the Marxist world outlook of materialist
dialectics. It is only the reactionary ruling classes of the past and present
and the metaphysicians in their service who regard opposites not as living,
conditional, mobile and transforming themselves into one another, but as
dead and rigid, and they propagate this fallacy everywhere to delude the
masses of the people, thus seeking to perpetuate their rule. The task of
Communists is to expose the fallacies of the reactionaries and metaphysicians,
to propagate the dialectics inherent in things, and so accelerate the
transformation of things and achieve the goal of revolution.

In speaking of the identity of opposites in given conditions, what we are
referring to is real and concrete opposites and the real and concrete
transformations of opposites into one another. There are innumerable
transformations in mythology, for instance, Kua Fu's race with the sun in
Shan Hai Ching, [17] Yi's shooting down
of nine suns in Huai Nan Tzu, [18] the Monkey
King's seventy-two metamorphoses in Hsi Yu Chi,
[19] the numerous episodes of ghosts and foxes
metamorphosed into human beings in the Strange Tales of Liao Chai,
[20] etc. But these legendary transformations
of opposites are not concrete changes reflecting concrete contradictions.
They are naive, imaginary, subjectively conceived transformations conjured
up in men's minds by innumerable real and complex transformations of opposites
into one another. Marx said, "All mythology masters and dominates and shapes
the forces of nature in and through the imagination; hence it disappears
as soon as man gains mastery over the forces of nature."
[21] The myriads of changes in mythology (and also in
nursery tales) delight people because they imaginatively picture man's conquest
of the forces of nature, and the best myths possess "eternal charm", as Marx
put it; but myths are not built out of the concrete contradictions existing
in given conditions and therefore are not a scientific reflection of reality.
That is to say, in myths or nursery tales the aspects constituting a
contradiction have only an imaginary identity, not a concrete identity. The
scientific reflection of the identity in real transformations is Marxist
dialectics.

Why can an egg but not a stone be transformed into a chicken? Why is there
identity between war and peace and none between war and a stone? Why can
human beings give birth only to human beings and not to anything else? The
sole reason is that the identity of opposites exists only in necessary given
conditions. Without these necessary given conditions there can be no identity
whatsoever.

Why is it that in Russia in 1917 the bourgeois-democratic February Revolution
was directly linked with the proletarian socialist October Revolution, while
in France the bourgeois revolution was not directly linked with a socialist
revolution and the Paris Commune of 1871 ended in failure? Why is it, on
the other hand, that the nomadic system of Mongolia and Central Asia has
been directly linked with socialism? Why is it that the Chinese revolution
can avoid a capitalist future and be directly linked with socialism without
taking the old historical road of the Western countries, without passing
through a period of bourgeois dictatorship? The sole reason is the concrete
conditions of the time. When certain necessary conditions are present, certain
contradictions arise in the process of development of things and, moreover,
the opposites contained in them are interdependent and become transformed
into one another; otherwise none of this would be possible.

Such is the problem of identity. What then is struggle? And what is the relation
between identity and struggle?

Lenin said:

 The unity (coincidence, identity, equal action) of opposites is conditional,
 temporary, transitory, relative. The struggle of mutually exclusive opposites
 is absolute, just as development and motion are absolute.
 [22]

What does this passage mean?

All processes have a beginning and an end, all processes transform themselves
into their opposites. The constancy of all processes is relative, but the
mutability manifested in the transformation of one process into another is
absolute.

There are two states of motion in all things, that of relative rest and that
of conspicuous change. Both are caused by the struggle between the two
contradictory elements contained in a thing. When the thing is in the first
state of motion, it is undergoing only quantitative and not qualitative change
and consequently presents the outward appearance of being at rest. When the
thing is in the second state of motion, the quantitative change of the first
state has already reached a culminating point and gives rise to the dissolution
of the thing as an entity and thereupon a qualitative change ensues, hence
the appearance of a conspicuous change. Such unity, solidarity, combination,
harmony, balance, stalemate, deadlock, rest, constancy, equilibrium, solidity,
attraction, etc., as we see in daily life, are all the appearances of things
in the state of quantitative change. On the other hand, the dissolution of
unity, that is, the destruction of this solidarity, combination, harmony,
balance, stalemate, deadlock, rest, constancy, equilibrium, solidity and
attraction, and the change of each into its opposite are all the appearances
of things in the state of qualitative change, the transformation of one process
into another. Things are constantly transforming themselves from the first
into the second state of motion; the struggle of opposites goes on in both
states but the contradiction is resolved through the second state. That is
why we say that the unity of opposites is conditional, temporary and relative,
while the struggle of mutually exclusive opposites is absolute.

When we said above that two opposite things can coexist in a single entity
and can transform themselves into each other because there is identity between
them, we were speaking of conditionality, that is to say, in given conditions
two contradictory things can be united and can transform themselves into
each other, but in the absence of these conditions, they cannot constitute
a contradiction, cannot coexist in the same entity and cannot transform
themselves into one another. It is because the identity of opposites obtains
only in given conditions that we have said identity is conditional and relative.
We may add that the struggle between opposites permeates a process from beginning
to end and makes one process transform itself into another, that it is
ubiquitous, and that struggle is therefore unconditional and absolute.

The combination of conditional, relative identity and unconditional, absolute
struggle constitutes the movement of opposites in all things.

We Chinese often say, "Things that oppose each other also complement each
other." [23] That is, things opposed to each other have
identity. This saying is dialectical and contrary to metaphysics. "Oppose
each other" refers to the mutual exclusion or the struggle of two contradictory
aspects. "Complement each other" means that in given conditions the two
contradictory aspects unite and achieve identity. Yet struggle is inherent
in identity and without struggle there can be no identity.

In identity there is struggle, in particularity there is universality, and
in individuality there is generality. To quote Lenin, ". . . there is an
absolute in the relative." [24]