IV. THE PRINCIPAL CONTRADICTION AND THE PRINCIPAL ASPECT OF A CONTRADICTION

There are still two points in the problem of the particularity of contradiction
which must be singled out for analysis, namely, the principal contradiction
and the principal aspect of a contradiction.

There are many contradictions in the process of development of a complex
thing, and one of them is necessarily the principal contradiction whose existence
and development determine or influence the existence and development of the
other contradictions.

For instance, in capitalist society the two forces in contradiction, the
proletariat and the bourgeoisie, form the principal contradiction. The other
contradictions, such as those between the remnant feudal class and the
bourgeoisie, between the peasant petty bourgeoisie and the bourgeoisie, between
the proletariat and the peasant petty bourgeoisie, between the non-monopoly
capitalists and the monopoly capitalists, between bourgeois democracy and
bourgeois fascism, among the capitalist countries and between imperialism
and the colonies, are all determined or influenced by this principal
contradiction.

In a semi-colonial country such as China, the relationship between the principal
contradiction and the non-principal contradictions presents a complicated
picture.

When imperialism launches a war of aggression against such a country, all
its various classes, except for some traitors, can temporarily unite in a
national war against imperialism. At such a time, the contradiction between
imperialism and the country concerned becomes the principal contradiction,
while all the contradictions among the various classes within the country
(including what was the principal contradiction, between the feudal system
and the great masses of the people) are temporarily relegated to a secondary
and subordinate position. So it was in China in the Opium War of 1840, the
Sino-Japanese War of 1894 and the Yi Ho Tuan War of 1900, and so it is now
in the present Sino-Japanese War.

But in another situation, the contradictions change position. When imperialism
carries on its oppression not by war, but by milder means; political, economic
and cultural; the ruling classes in semi-colonial countries capitulate to
imperialism, and the two form an alliance for the joint oppression of the
masses of the people. At such a time, the masses often resort to civil war
against the alliance of imperialism and the feudal classes, while imperialism
often employs indirect methods rather than direct action in helping the
reactionaries in the semi-colonial countries to oppress the people, and thus
the internal contradictions become particularly sharp. This is what happened
in China in the Revolutionary War of 1911, the Revolutionary War of 1924-27,
and the ten years of Agrarian Revolutionary War after 1927. Wars among the
various reactionary ruling groups in the semi-colonial countries, e.g., the
wars among the warlords in China, fall into the same category.

When a revolutionary civil war develops to the point of threatening the very
existence of imperialism and its running dogs, the domestic reactionaries,
imperialism often adopts other methods in order to maintain its rule; it
either tries to split the revolutionary front from within or sends armed
forces to help the domestic reactionaries directly. At such a time, foreign
imperialism and domestic reaction stand quite openly at one pole while the
masses of the people stand at the other pole, thus forming the principal
contradiction which determines or influences the development of the other
contradictions. The assistance given by various capitalist countries to the
Russian reactionaries after the October Revolution is an example of armed
intervention. Chiang Kai-shek's betrayal in 1927 is an example of splitting
the revolutionary front.

But whatever happens, there is no doubt at all that at every stage in the
development of a process, there is only one principal contradiction which
plays the leading role.

Hence, if in any process there are a number of contradictions, one of them
must be the principal contradiction playing the leading and decisive role,
while the rest occupy a secondary and subordinate position. Therefore, in
studying any complex process in which there are two or more contradictions,
we must devote every effort to finding its principal contradiction. Once
this principal contradiction is grasped, all problems can be readily solved.
This is the method Marx taught us in his study of capitalist society. Likewise
Lenin and Stalin taught us this method when they studied imperialism and
the general crisis of capitalism and when they studied the Soviet economy.
There are thousands of scholars and men of action who do not understand it,
and the result is that, lost in a fog, they are unable to get to the heart
of a problem and naturally cannot find a way to resolve its contradictions.

As we have said, one must not treat all the contradictions in a process as
being equal but must distinguish between the principal and the secondary
contradictions, and pay special attention to grasping the principal one.
But, in any given contradiction, whether principal or secondary, should the
two contradictory aspects be treated as equal? Again, no. In any contradiction
the development of the contradictory aspects is uneven. Sometimes they seem
to be in equilibrium, which is however only temporary and relative, while
unevenness is basic. Of the two contradictory aspects, one must be principal
and the other secondary. The principal aspect is the one playing the leading
role in the contradiction. The nature of a thing is determined mainly by
the principal aspect of a contradiction, the aspect which has gained the
dominant position.

But this situation is not static; the principal and the non-principal aspects
of a contradiction transform themselves into each other and the nature of
the thing changes accordingly. In a given process or at a given stage in
the development of a contradiction, A is the principal aspect and B is the
non-principal aspect; at another stage or in another process the roles are
reversed; a change determined by the extent of the increase or decrease in
the force of each aspect in its struggle against the other in the course
of the development of a thing.

We often speak of "the new superseding the old". The supersession of the
old by the new is a general, eternal and inviolable law of the universe.
The transformation of one thing into another, through leaps of different
forms in accordance with its essence and external conditions; this is the
process of the new superseding the old. In each thing there is contradiction
between its new and its old aspects, and this gives rise to a series of struggles
with many twists and turns. As a result of these struggles, the new aspect
changes from being minor to being major and rises to predominance, while
the old aspect changes from being major to being minor and gradually dies
out. And the moment the new aspect gains dominance over the old, the old
thing changes qualitatively into a new thing. It can thus be seen that the
nature of a thing is mainly determined by the principal aspect of the
contradiction, the aspect which has gained predominance. When the principal
aspect which has gained predominance changes, the nature of a thing changes
accordingly.

In capitalist society, capitalism has changed its position from being a
subordinate force in the old feudal era to being the dominant force, and
the nature of society has accordingly changed from feudal to capitalist.
In the new, capitalist era, the feudal forces changed from their former dominant
position to a subordinate one, gradually dying out. Such was the case, for
example, in Britain and France. With the development of the productive forces,
the bourgeoisie changes from being a new class playing a progressive role
to being an old class playing a reactionary role, until it is finally overthrown
by the proletariat and becomes a class deprived of privately owned means
of production and stripped of power, when it, too, gradually dies out. The
proletariat, which is much more numerous than the bourgeoisie and grows
simultaneously with it but under its rule, is a new force which, initially
subordinate to the bourgeoisie, gradually gains strength, becomes an independent
class playing the leading role in history, and finally seizes political power
and becomes the ruling class. Thereupon the nature of society changes and
the old capitalist society becomes the new socialist society. This is the
path already taken by the Soviet Union, a path that all other countries will
inevitably take.

Look at China, for instance. Imperialism occupies the principal position
in the contradiction in which China has been reduced to a semi-colony, it
oppresses the Chinese people, and China has been changed from an independent
country into a semi-colonial one. But this state of affairs will inevitably
change; in the struggle between the two sides, the power of the Chinese people
which is growing under the leadership of the proletariat will inevitably
change China from a semi-colony into an independent country, whereas imperialism
will be overthrown and old China will inevitably change into New China.

The change of old China into New China also involves a change in the relation
between the old feudal forces and the new popular forces within the country.
The old feudal landlord class will be overthrown, and from being the ruler
it will change into being the ruled; and this class, too, will gradually
die out. From being the ruled, the people, led by the proletariat, will become
the rulers. Thereupon, the nature of Chinese society will change and the
old, semi-colonial and semi-feudal society will change into a new democratic
society.

Instances of such reciprocal transformation are found in our past experience.
The Ching Dynasty which ruled China for nearly three hundred years was overthrown
in the Revolution of 1911, and the revolutionary Tung Meng Hui under
Sun Yat-sen's leadership was victorious for a time. In the Revolutionary
War of 1924-27, the revolutionary forces of the Communist-Kuomintang alliance
in the south changed from being weak to being strong and won victory in the
Northern Expedition, while the Northern warlords who once ruled the roost
were overthrown. In 1927, the people's forces led by the Communist Party
were greatly reduced numerically under the attacks of Kuomintang reaction,
but with the elimination of opportunism within their ranks they gradually
grew again. In the revolutionary base areas under Communist leadership, the
peasants have been transformed from being the ruled to being the rulers,
while the landlords have undergone a reverse transformation. It is always
so in the world, the new displacing the old, the old being superseded by
the new, the old being eliminated to make way for the new, and the new emerging
out of the old.

At certain times in the revolutionary struggle, the difficulties outweigh
the favourable conditions and so constitute the principal aspect of the
contradiction and the favourable conditions constitute the secondary aspect.
But through their efforts the revolutionaries can overcome the difficulties
step by step and open up a favourable new situation; thus a difficult situation
yields place to a favourable one. This is what happened after the failure
of the revolution in China in 1927 and during the Long March of the Chinese
Red Army. In the present Sino-Japanese War, China is again in a difficult
position, but we can change this and fundamentally transform the situation
as between China and Japan. Conversely, favourable conditions can be transformed
into difficulty if the revolutionaries make mistakes. Thus the victory of
the revolution of 1924-27 turned into defeat. The revolutionary base areas
which grew up in the southern provinces after 1927 had all suffered defeat
by 1934.

When we engage in study, the same holds good for the contradiction in the
passage from ignorance to knowledge. At the very beginning of our study of
Marxism, our ignorance of or scanty acquaintance with Marxism stands in
contradiction to knowledge of Marxism. But by assiduous study, ignorance
can be transformed into knowledge, scanty knowledge into substantial knowledge,
and blindness in the application of Marxism into mastery of its application.

Some people think that this is not true of certain contradictions. For instance,
in the contradiction between the productive forces and the relations of
production, the productive forces are the principal aspect; in the contradiction
between theory and practice, practice is the principal aspect; in the
contradiction between the economic base and the superstructure, the economic
base is the principal aspect; and there is no change in their respective
positions. This is the mechanical materialist conception, not the dialectical
materialist conception. True, the productive forces, practice and the economic
base generally play the principal and decisive role; whoever denies this
is not a materialist. But it must also be admitted that in certain conditions,
such aspects as the relations of production, theory and the superstructure
in turn manifest themselves in the principal and decisive role. When it is
impossible for the productive forces to develop without a change in the relations
of production, then the change in the relations of production plays the principal
and decisive role. The creation and advocacy of revolutionary theory plays
the principal and decisive role in those times of which Lenin said, "Without
revolutionary theory there can be no revolutionary movement."
[15] When a task, no matter which, has to be performed,
but there is as yet no guiding line, method, plan or policy, the principal
and decisive thing is to decide on a guiding line, method, plan or policy.
When the superstructure (politics, culture, etc.) obstructs the development
of the economic base, political and cultural changes become principal and
decisive. Are we going against materialism when we say this? No. The reason
is that while we recognize that in the general development of history the
material determines the mental and social being determines social consciousness,
we also; and indeed must; recognize the reaction of mental on material things,
of social consciousness on social being and of the superstructure on the
economic base. This does not go against materialism; on the contrary, it
avoids mechanical materialism and firmly upholds dialectical materialism.

In studying the particularity of contradiction, unless we examine these two
facets; the principal and the non-principal contradictions in a process,
and the principal and the non-principal aspects of a contradiction; that
is, unless we examine the distinctive character of these two facets of
contradiction, we shall get bogged down in abstractions, be unable to understand
contradiction concretely and consequently be unable to find the correct method
of resolving it. The distinctive character or particularity of these two
facets of contradiction represents the unevenness of the forces that are
in contradiction. Nothing in this world develops absolutely evenly; we must
oppose the theory of even development or the theory of equilibrium. Moreover,
it is these concrete features of a contradiction and the changes in the principal
and non-principal aspects of a contradiction in the course of its development
that manifest the force of the new superseding the old. The study of the
various states of unevenness in contradictions, of the principal and
non-principal contradictions and of the principal and the non-principal aspects
of a contradiction constitutes an essential method by which a revolutionary
political party correctly determines its strategic and tactical policies
both in political and in military affairs. All Communists must give it attention.