Karl Marx
Critique of the Gotha Programme

Appendix

"2. Normal working day."

In no other country has the workers' party limited itself to such an indefinitedemand, but has always fixed the length of the working day that it considersnormal under the given circumstances.

"3. Restriction of female labor and prohibition of child labor."

The standardization of the working day must include the restriction offemale labor, insofar as it relates to the duration, intermissions, etc.,of the working day; otherwise, it could only mean the exclusion of femalelabor from branches of industry that are especially unhealthy for the femalebody, or are objectionable morally for the female sex. If that is whatwas meant, it should have been said so.

"Prohibition of child labor." Here it was absolutely essentialto state the age limit.

A general prohibition of child labor is incompatible with theexistence of large-scale industry and hence an empty, pious wish. Its realization; if it were possible ; would be reactionary, since, with a strict regulationof the working time according to the different age groups and other safetymeasures for the protection of children, an early combination of productivelabor with education is one of the most potent means for the transformationof present-day society.

"4. State supervision of factory, workshop, and domestic industry."

In consideration of the Prusso-German state, it should definitely havebeen demanded that the inspectors are to be removable only by a court oflaw; that any worker can have them prosecuted for neglect of duty; thatthey must belong to the medical profession.

"5. Regulation of prison labor."

A petty demand in a general workers' program. In any case, it should havebeen clearly stated that there is no intention from fear of competitionto allow ordinary criminals to be treated like beasts, and especially thatthere is no desire to deprive them of their sole means of betterment, productivelabor. This was surely the least one might have expected from socialists.

"6. An effective liability law."

It should have been stated what is meant by an "effective" liability law.

Be it noted, incidentally, that, in speaking of the normal workingday, the part of factory legislation that deals with health regulationsand safety measures, etc., has been overlooked. The liability law comesinto operation only when these regulations are infringed.

In short, this appendix also is distinguished by slovenly editing.

Dixi et salvavi animam meam.

[I have spoken and saved my soul.]