(b) Book-keeping

Apart from the actual buying and selling, labour-time is expended on book-keeping,
which besides absorbs materialised labour such as pens, ink, paper, desks,
office paraphernalia. This function, therefore, exacts the expenditure
on the one hand of labour-power and on the other of instruments of labour.
It is the same condition of things as obtained in the case of the time
of purchase and sale.

As unity within its circuits, as value in motion, whether in the
sphere of production or in either phase of the sphere of circulation, capital
exists ideally only in the form of money of account, primarily in the mind
of the producer of commodities, the capitalist producer of commodities.
This movement is fixed and controlled by book-keeping, which includes the
determination of prices, or the calculation of the prices of commodities.
The movement of production, especially of the production of surplus-value
; in which the commodities figure only as depositories of value, as the
names of things whose ideal existence as values is crystallised in money
of account ; thus is symbolically reflected in imagination. So long as
the individual producer of commodities keeps account only in his head (for
instance, a peasant; the book-keeping tenant-farmer was not produced until
the rise of capitalist agriculture), or books his expenditures, receipts,
due dates of payments, etc., only incidentally, outside of his production
time, it is palpably clear that this function and the instruments of labour
consumed by it, such as paper, etc., represent additional consumption of
labour-time and instruments which are necessary, but constitute a deduction
from the time available for productive consumption as well as from the
instruments of labour which functions in the real process of production,
enter into the creation of products and value.[12] The
nature of the function is not changed ; neither by the dimensions which
it assumes on account of its concentration in the hands of the capitalist
producer of commodities and the fact that instead of appearing as the function
of many small commodity-producers it appears as the function of one capitalist, as a function within a process of large-scale production; nor is it altered
by its divorcement from those productive functions of which it formed an
appendage, nor by its conversion into an independent function of special
agents exclusively entrusted with it.

Division of labour and assumption of independence do not make
a function one that creates products and value if it was not so intrinsically,
hence before it became independent. If a capitalist invests his capital
anew, he must invest a part of it in hiring a book-keeper, etc., and in
the wherewithal of book-keeping. If his capital is already functioning,
is engaged in the process of its own constant reproduction, he must continually
reconvert a part of his product into a book-keeper, clerks, and the like,
by transforming that part into money. That part of his capital is withdrawn
from the process of production and belongs in the costs of circulation,
deductions from the total yield (including the labour-power itself that
is expended exclusively for this function).

But there is a certain difference between the costs incidental
to book-keeping, or the unproductive expenditure of labour-time on the
one hand and those of mere buying and selling time on the other. The latter
arise only from the definite social form of the process of production,
from the fact that it is the process of production of commodities. Book-keeping,
as the control and ideal synthesis of the process, becomes the more necessary
the more the process assumes a social scale and loses its purely individual
character. It is therefore more necessary in capitalist production than
in the scattered production of handicraft and peasant economy, more necessary
in collective production than in capitalist production. But the costs of
book-keeping drop as production becomes concentrated and book-keeping becomes
social.

We are concerned here only with the general character of the costs
of circulation, which arise out of the metamorphosis of forms alone. It
is superfluous to discuss here all their forms in detail. But how forms
which belong in the sphere of pure changes of the form of value and hence
originate from the particular social form of the process of production,
forms which in the case of the individual commodity-producer are only transient,
barely perceptible elements, run alongside his productive functions or
become intertwined with them ; how these can strike the eye as the huge
costs of circulation can be seen from just the money taken in and paid
out when these operations have become independent and concentrated on a
large scale as the exclusive function of banks, etc., or of cashiers in
individual businesses. But it must be firmly borne in mind that these costs
of circulation are not changed in character by their change in appearance.