Vladimir Ilyich Lenin

Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism

A POPULAR OUTLINE

VIII. PARASITISM AND DECAY OF CAPITALISM

We now have to examine yet another significant aspect of
 imperialism to which most of the discussions on the subject
 usually attach insufficient importance. One of the shortcomings
 of the Marxist Hilferding is that on this point he has taken a
 step backward compared with the non-Marxist Hobson. I refer to
 parasitism, which is characteristic of imperialism.

As we have seen, the deepest economic foundation of imperialism
 is monopoly. This is capitalist monopoly, i.e., monopoly which
 has grown out of capitalism and which exists in the general
 environment of capitalism, commodity production and competition,
 in permanent and insoluble contradiction to this general
 environment. Nevertheless, like all monopoly, it inevitably
 engenders a tendency of stagnation and decay. Since monopoly
 prices are established, even temporarily, the motive cause of
 technical and, consequently, of all other progress disappears to
 a certain extent and, further, the economic possibility arises
 of deliberately retarding technical progress. For instance, in
 America, a certain Owens invented a machine which revolutionised
 the manufacture of bottles. The German bottle-manufacturing
 cartel purchased Owens's patent, but pigeon-holed it, refrained
 from utilising it. Certainly, monopoly under capitalism can
 never completely, and for a very long period of time, eliminate
 competition in the world market (and this, by the by, is one of
 the reasons why the theory of ultra-imperialism is so
 absurd). Certainly, the possibility of reducing the cost of
 production and increasing profits by introducing technical
 improvements operates in the direction of change. But the
 tendency to stagnation and decay, which is characteristic of
 monopoly, continues to operate, and in some branches of
 industry, in some countries, for certain periods of time, it
 gains the upper hand.

The monopoly ownership of very extensive, rich or well-situated
 colonies operates in the same direction.

Further, imperialism is an immense accumulation of money capital
 in a few countries, amounting, as we have seen, to
 100,000-150,000 million francs in securities. Hence the
 extraordinary growth of a class, or rather, of a stratum of
 rentiers, i.e., people who live by "clipping coupons," who take
 no part in any enterprise whatever, whose profession is
 idleness. The export of capital, one of the most essential
 economic bases of imperialism, still more completely isolates
 the rentiers from production and sets the seal of parasitism on
 the whole country that lives by exploiting the labour of several
 overseas countries and colonies.

"In 1893," writes Hobson, "the British capital invested abroad
 represented about 15 per cent of the total wealth of the United
 Kingdom."[1]

 Let me remind the reader that by 1915 this capital had increased
 about two and a half times. "Aggressive imperialism," says
 Hobson further on, "which costs the tax-payer so dear, which is
 of so little value to the manufacturer and trader ... is a
 source of great gain to the investor.... The annual income Great
 Britain derives from commissions in her whole foreign and
 colonial trade, import and export, is estimated by Sir R. Giffen
 at &pound;18,000,000 (nearly 170 million rubles) for 1899, taken
 at 2 1/2 per cent, upon a turnover of &pound;800,000,000." Great
 as this sum is, it cannot explain the aggressive imperialism of
 Great Britain, which is explained by the income of &pound;90
 million to &pound;100 million from "invested" capital, the
 income of the rentiers.

The income of the rentiers is five times greater than
 the income obtained from the foreign trade of the biggest
 "trading" country in the world! This is the essence of
 imperialism and imperialist parasitism.

For that reason the term "rentier state" (Rentnerstaat), or
 usurer state, is coming into common use in the economic
 literature that deals with imperialism. The world has become
 divided into a handful of usurer states and a vast majority of
 debtor states. "At the top of the list of foreign investments,"
 says Schulze-Gaevernitz, "are those placed

in politically
 dependent or allied countries: Great Britain grants loans to
 Egypt, Japan, China and South America. Her navy plays here the
 part of bailiff in case of necessity. Great Britain's political
 power protects her from the indignation of her
debtors."[2]

Sartorius
 von Waltershausen in his book, The National Economic System
 of Capital Investments Abroad, cites Holland as the model
 "rentier state" and points out that Great Britain and France are
 now becoming
such.[3]

Schilder is of the opinion that five
 industrial states have become "definitely pronounced creditor
 countries": Great Britain, France, Germany, Belgium and
 Switzerland. He does not include Holland in this list simply
 because she is "industrially little
developed."[4]

The United States is
 a creditor only of the American countries.

"Great Britain," says Schulze-Gaevernitz, "is gradually becoming
 transformed from an industrial into a creditor
 state. Notwithstanding the absolute increase in industrial
 output and the export of manufactured goods, there is an
 increase in the relative importance of income from interest and
 dividends, issues of securities, commissions and speculation in
 the whole of the national economy. In my opinion it is precisely
 this that forms the economic basis of imperialist
 ascendancy. The creditor is more firmly attached to the debtor
 than the seller is to the
buyer.[5]

In regard to Germany, A. Lansburgh,
 the publisher of the Berlin Die Bank, in 1911, in an
 article entitled "Germany; a Rentier State", wrote the
 following: "People in Germany are ready to sneer at the yearning
 to become rentiers that is observed in France. But they forget
 that as far as the bourgeoisie is concerned the situation in
 Germany is becoming more and more like that in
France."[6]

The rentier state is a state of parasitic, decaying capitalism,
 and this circumstance cannot fail to influence all the
 socio-political conditions of the countries concerned, in
 general, and the two fundamental trends in the working-class

movement, in particular. To demonstrate this in the clearest
 possible manner let me quote Hobson, who is a most reliable
 witness, since he cannot be suspected of leaning towards Marxist
 orthodoxy; on the other hand, he is an Englishman who is very
 well acquainted with the situation in the country which is
 richest in colonies, in finance capital, and in imperialist
 experience.

With the Anglo-Boer War fresh in his mind, Hobson describes the
 connection between imperialism and the interests of the
 "financiers," their growing profits from contracts, supplies,
 etc., and writes: "While the directors of this definitely
 parasitic policy are capitalists, the same motives appeal to
 special classes of the workers. In many towns most important
 trades are dependent upon government employment or contracts;
 the imperialism of the metal and shipbuilding centres is
 attributable in no small degree to this fact." Two sets of
 circumstances, in this writer's opinion, have weakened the old
 empires: (1) "economic parasitism," and (2) the formation of
 armies recruited from subject peoples. "There is first the habit
 of economic parasitism, by which the ruling state has used its
 provinces, colonies, and dependencies in order to enrich its
 ruling class and to bribe its lower classes into
 acquiescence." And I shall add that the economic possibility of
 such bribery, whatever its form may be, requires high monopolist
 profits.

As for the second circumstance, Hobson writes: "One of the
 strangest symptoms of the blindness of imperialism is the
 reckless indifference with which Great Britain, France and other
 imperial nations are embarking on this perilous
 dependence. Great Britain has gone farthest. Most of the
 fighting by which we have won our Indian Empire has been done by
 natives; in India, as more recently in Egypt, great standing
 armies are placed under British commanders; almost all the
 fighting associated with our African dominions, except in the
 southern part, has been done for us by natives."

Hobson gives the following economic appraisal of the prospect of
 the partitioning of China: "The greater part of Western Europe
 might then assume the appearance and character already exhibited
 by tracts of country in the

South of England, in the Riviera and
 in the tourist-ridden or residential parts of Italy and
 Switzerland, little clusters of wealthy aristocrats drawing
 dividends and pensions from the Far East, with a somewhat larger
 group of professional retainers and tradesmen and a larger body
 of personal servants and workers in the transport trade and in
 the final stages of production of the more perishable goods; all
 the main arterial industries would have disappeared, the staple
 foods and manufactures flowing in as tribute from Asia and
 Africa. . . . We have foreshadowed the possibility of even a
 larger alliance of Western states, a European federation of
 great powers which, so far from forwarding the cause of world
 civilisation, might introduce the gigantic peril of a Western
 parasitism, a group of advanced industrial nations, whose upper
 classes drew vast tribute from Asia and Africa, with which they
 supported great tame masses of retainers, no longer engaged in
 the staple industries of agriculture and manufacture, but kept
 in the performance of personal or minor industrial services
 under the control of a new financial aristocracy. Let those who
 would scout such a theory (it would be better to say: prospect)
 as undeserving of consideration examine the economic and social
 condition of districts in Southern England today which are
 already reduced to this condition, and reflect upon the vast
 extension of such a system which might be rendered feasible by
 the subjection of China to the economic control of similar
 groups of financiers, investors, and political and business
 officials, draining the greatest potential reservoir of profit
 the world has ever known, in order to consume it in Europe. The
 situation is far too complex, the play of world forces far too
 incalculable, to render this or any other single interpretation
 of the future very probable; but the influences which govern the
 imperialism of Western Europe today are moving in this
 direction, and, unless counteracted or diverted, make towards
 some such
consummation."[7]

The author is quite right: if the forces of imperialism had not
 been counteracted they would have led precisely to what he has
 described. The significance of a "United States of Europe" in
 the present imperialist situation is

correctly appraised. He
 should have added, however, that, also within the
 working-class movement, the opportunists, who are for the moment
 victorious in most countries, are "working" systematically and
 undeviatingly in this very direction. Imperialism, which means
 the partitioning of the world, and the exploitation of other
 countries besides China, which means high monopoly profits for a
 handful of very rich countries, makes it economically possible
 to bribe the upper strata of the proletariat, and thereby
 fosters, gives shape to, and strengthens opportunism. We must
 not, however, lose sight of the forces which counteract
 imperialism in general, and opportunism in particular, and
 which, naturally, the social-liberal Hobson is unable to
 perceive.

The German opportunist, Gerhard Hildebrand, who was once
 expelled from the Party for defending imperialism, and who could
 today be a leader of the so-called "Social-Democratic" Party of
 Germany, supplements Hobson well by his advocacy of a "United
 States of Western Europe" (without Russia) for the purpose of
 "joint" action ... against the African Negroes, against the
 "great Islamic movement," for the maintenance of a "powerful
 army and navy", against a "Sino-Japanese
coalition,"[8]

etc.

The description of "British imperialism" in Schulze-Gaevernitz's
 book reveals the same parasitical traits. The national income of
 Great Britain approximately doubled from 1865 to 1898, while the
 income "from abroad" increased nine-fold in the same
 period. While the "merit" of imperialism is that it "trains the
 Negro to habits of industry" (you cannot manage without coercion
 ... ), the "danger" of imperialism lies in that "Europe will
 shift the burden of physical toil; first agricultural and
 mining, then the rougher work in industry; on to the
 coloured races, and itself be content with the role of rentier,
 and in this way, perhaps, pave the way for the economic, and
 later, the political emancipation of the coloured races."

An increasing proportion of land in England is being taken out
 of cultivation and used for sport, for the diversion

of the
rich. As far as Scotland; the most aristocratic place for
 hunting and other sports; is concerned, it is said that
 "it lives on its past and on Mr. Carnegie" (the American
 multimillionaire). On horse racing and fox hunting alone England
 annually spends &pound;14,000,000 (nearly 130 million
 rubles). The number of rentiers in England is about one
 million. The percentage of the productively employed population
 to the total population is declining:

 Population
England and
 
Wales (000,000)

 Workers in 
basic
 industries
(000,000)

 Per cent of 
total popula-
tion

 1851.....
 17.9
 4.1
 23

 1901.....
 32.5
 4.9
 15

And in speaking of the British working class the bourgeois
 student of "British imperialism at the beginning of the
 twentieth century" is obliged to distinguish systematically
 between the "upper stratum" of the workers and the
 "lower stratum of the proletariat proper." The
 upper stratum furnishes the bulk of the membership of
 co-operatives, of trade unions, of sporting clubs and of
 numerous religious sects. To this level is adapted the electoral
 system, which in Great Britain is still "sufficiently
 restricted to exclude the lower stratum of the proletariat
 proper"! In order to present the condition of the British
 working class in a rosy light, only this upper stratum; which
 constitutes a minority of the proletariat; is usually
 spoken of. For instance, "the problem of unemployment
 is mainly a London problem and that of the lower
 proletarian stratum, to which the politicians attach little
 importance..."[9]

He should have said: to which
 the bourgeois politicians and the "socialist" opportunists
 attach little importance.

One of the special features of imperialism connected with the
 facts I am describing, is the decline in emigration from
 imperialist countries and the increase in immigration into these
 countries from the more backward countries where lower wages are
 paid. As Hobson observes, emigration from Great Britain has been
 declining since 1884. In that year the number of emigrants was
 242,000,

while in 1900, the number was 169,000. Emigration from
 Germany reached the highest point between 1881 and 1890, with a
 total of 1,453,000 emigrants. In the course of the following two
 decades, it fell to 544,000 and to 341,000. On the other hand,
 there was an increase in the number of workers entering Germany
 from Austria, Italy, Russia and other countries. According to
 the 1907 census, there were 1,342,294 foreigners in Germany, of
 whom 440,800 were industrial workers and 257,329 agricultural
workers.[10]

In France, the workers employed in
 the mining industry are, "in great part," foreigners: Poles,
 Italians and
Spaniards.[11]

In the United States, immigrants
 from Eastern and Southern Europe are engaged in the most poorly
 paid jobs, while American workers provide the highest percentage
 of overseers or of the better-paid
workers.[12]

Imperialism has
 the tendency to create privileged sections also among the
 workers, and to detach them from the broad masses of the
 proletariat.

It must be observed that in Great Britain the tendency of
 imperialism to split the workers, to strengthen opportunism
 among them and to cause temporary decay in the working-class
 movement, revealed itself much earlier than the end of the
 nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth centuries; for two
 important distinguishing features of imperialism were already
 observed in Great Britain in the middle of the nineteenth
 century; vast colonial possessions and a monopolist
 position in the world market. Marx and Engels traced this
 connection between opportunism in the working-class movement and
 the imperialist features of British capitalism systematically,
 during the course of several decades. For example, on October 7,
 1858, Engels wrote to Marx: "The English proletariat is actually
 becoming more and more bourgeois, so that this most bourgeois of
 all nations is apparently aiming ultimately at the possession of
 a bourgeois aristocracy and a bourgeois proletariat
 alongside the bourgeoisie. For a nation which exploits
 the whole world this is of course to a certain extent
justifiable."[13] Almost a quarter of a century later, in

a letter
 dated August 11, 1881, Engels speaks of the "worst English trade
 unions which allow themselves to be led by men sold to, or at
 least paid by, the middle class". In a letter to Kautsky, dated
 September 12, 1882, Engels wrote: "You ask me what the English
 workers think about colonial policy. Well, exactly the same as
 they think about politics in general. There is no workers' party
 here, there are only Conservatives and Liberal-Radicals, and the
 workers gaily share the feast of England's monopoly of the world
 market and the
colonies."[13]

(Engels expressed similar ideas in
 the press in his preface to the second edition of The
 Condition of the Working Class in England, which appeared
 in 1892.)

This clearly shows the causes and effects. The causes are: (1)
 exploitation of the whole world by this country; (2) its
 monopolist position in the world market; (3) its colonial
 monopoly. The effects are: (1) a section of the British
 proletariat becomes bourgeois; (2) a section of the proletariat
 allows itself to be led by men bought by, or at least paid by,
 the bourgeoisie. The imperialism of the beginning of the
 twentieth century completed the division of the world among a
 handful of states, each of which today exploits (in the sense of
 drawing superprofits from) a part of the "whole world" only a
 little smaller than that which England exploited in 1858; each
 of them occupies a monopolist position in the world market
 thanks to trusts, cartels, finance capital and creditor and
 debtor relations; each of them enjoys to some degree a colonial
 monopoly (we have seen that out of the total of 75,000,000
 sq. km., which comprise the whole colonial world,
 65,000,000 sq. km., or 86 per cent, belong to six
 powers; 61,000,000 sq. km., or 81 per cent, belong to
 three powers).

The distinctive feature of the present situation is the
 prevalence of such economic and political conditions that are
 bound to increase the irreconcilability between opportunism and
 the general and vital interests of the working-class movement:
 imperialism has grown from an embryo into the predominant
 system; capitalist monopolies occupy

first place in economics
 and politics; the division of the world has been completed; on
 the other hand, instead of the undivided monopoly of Great
 Britain, we see a few imperialist powers contending for the
 right to share in this monopoly, and this struggle is
 characteristic of the whole period of the early twentieth
 century. Opportunism cannot now be completely triumphant in the
 working-class movement of one country for decades as it was in
 Britain in the second half of the nineteenth century; but in a
 number of countries it has grown ripe, overripe, and rotten, and
 has become completely merged with bourgeois policy in the form
 of
"social-chauvinism".[14]

Notes

[1]

Hobson,
 op. cit., pp. 59, 62.
; Lenin

[2]

Schulze-Gaevernitz, Britischer Imperialismus, S. 320 et
 seq.
; Lenin

[3]

Sartorius von Waltershausen, Das
 volkswirtschaftliche System, etc., Berlin, 1907, Buch IV.
; Lenin

[4]

Schilder, op. cit., S. 393.
; Lenin

[5]

Schulze-Gaevernitz, op. cit., S. 122.
; Lenin

[6]

Die
 Bank, 1911, 1, S. 10-11.
; Lenin

[7]

Hobson,
 op. cit., pp. 103, 205, 144, 335, 386.
; Lenin

[8]

Gerhard
 Hildebrand, Die Erschütterung der Industrieherrschaft
 und des Industriesozialismus, 1910, S. 229 et seq.
; Lenin

[9]

Schulze-Gaevernitz, Britischer Imperialismus S. 301.
; Lenin

[10]

Statistik des Deutschen Reichs, Bd. 211.
; Lenin

[11]

Henger, Die Kapitalsanlage der Franzosen, Stuttgart,
 1913.
; Lenin

[12]

Hourwich, Immigralion and Labour, New York, 1913.
; Lenin

[13]

Briefwechsel von Marx und Engels, Bd. II, S. 290; 1V,
 433; Karl Kautsky, Sozialismus und
 Kolonialpolitik, Berlin, 1907, S. 79; this pamphlet was
 written by Kautsky in those infinitely distant days when he was
 still a Marxist.
; Lenin

[14]

Russian social-chauvinism in its overt form, represented by the
 Potresovs, Chkenkelis, Maslovs, etc., and its covert form
 (Chkeidze, Skobelev, Axelrod, Martov, etc.) also emerged from
 the Russian variety of opportunism, namely, liquidationism.
; Lenin

[15]

[PLACEHOLDER.]

VII. IMPERIALISM AS A SPECIAL STAGE OF CAPITALISM

 |

IX. CRITIQUE OF IMPERIALISM

 <
 backward

 Contents

 forward >

 Works
 Index | 

 Volume 22

 | 

 Collected Works

 | L.I.A. Index