II. Accumulation in Department II

We have hitherto assumed that A, A', A'' (I) sell their surplus-product
to B, B', B'', etc., who belong to the same department I. But supposing
A (I) converts his surplus-product into money by selling it to one B in
department II. This can be done only by A (I) selling means of
production to B (II) without subsequently buying articles of consumption,
i.e., only by a one-sided sale on A's part. Now whereas II c cannot be
converted from the commodity-capital form into the bodily form of
productive constant capital unless not only Iv but also at least a portion of
Is is exchanged for a portion of IIc, which IIc exists in the form of articles
of consumption; but now A converts his Is into money by not making this
exchange but rather withdrawing from circulation the money obtained
from II on the sale of his I s instead of exchanging it in the purchase of
articles of consumption II c ; then what we have on the part of A (I) is
indeed a formation of additional virtual money-capital, but on the other
hand a portion of the constant capital of B (II) of equal magnitude of
value is tied up in the form of commodity-capital, unable to transform
itself into the bodily form of productive, constant capital. In other words,
a portion of the commodities of B (II), and indeed primo facie a portion
without the sale of which he cannot reconvert his constant capital
entirely into its productive form, has become unsaleable. As far as this
portion is concerned there is therefore an over-production, which,
likewise as far as the same portion is concerned, clogs reproduction,
even on the same scale.

In this case the additional virtual money-capital on the side of A (I) is
indeed a moneyed form of surplus-product (surplus-value), but the
surplus-product (surplus-value) considered as such is here a
phenomenon of simple reproduction, not yet of reproduction on an
extended scale. I(v+s) for which this is true at all events of one portion of
s, must ultimately be exchanged for II c, in order that the reproduction of
II c may take place on the same scale. By the sale of his surplus-product
to B(II), A(I) has supplied to the latter a corresponding portion of the
value of constant capital in its bodily form. But at the same time he has
rendered an equivalent portion of the commodities of B (II) unsaleable
by withdrawing the money from circulation ; by failing to complement
his sale through subsequent purchase. Hence, if we survey the entire
social reproduction, which comprises the capitalists of both I and II, the
conversion of the surplus-product of A (I) into virtual money-capital
expresses the impossibility of reconverting commodity-capital of B (II)
representing an equal amount of value into productive (constant) capital II;
hence not virtual production on an extended scale but an obstruction
of simple reproduction, and so a deficit in simple reproduction. As the
formation and sale of the surplus-product of A (I) are normal phenomena
of simple reproduction, we have here even on the basis of simple
reproduction the following interdependent phenomena: Formation of
virtual additional money-capital in class I (hence under-consumption
from the view-point of II); piling up of commodity-supplies in class II
which cannot be reconverted into productive capital (hence relative over-production
in II); surplus of money-capital in I and reproduction deficit in
II.

Without pausing any longer at this point, we simply remark that we
had assumed in the analysis of simple reproduction that the entire
surplus-value of I and II is spent as revenue. As a matter of fact however
one portion of the surplus-value is spent as revenue, and the other is
converted into capital. Actual accumulation can take place only on this
assumption. That accumulation should take place at the expense of
consumption is, couched in such general terms, an illusion contradicting
the nature of capitalist production. For it takes for granted that the aim
and compelling motive of capitalist production is consumption, and not
the snatching of surplus-value and its capitalisation, i.e., accumulation.

Let us now take a closer look at the accumulation in department II.

The first difficulty with reference to II c, i.e., its reconversion from a
component part of commodity-capital II into the bodily form of constant
capital II, concerns simple reproduction. Let us take the former scheme:
(1,000 v + 1,000 s) I are exchanged for 2,000 II c.

Now, if for instance one half of the surplus-product of I, hence
1,000/2 s or 500 I s is reincorporated in department I as constant
capital, then this portion of the surplus-product, being detained in I,
cannot replace any part of II c. Instead of being converted into articles of
consumption (and here in this section of the circulation between I and II
the exchange is actually mutual, that is, there is a double change of
position of the commodities, unlike the replacement of 1,000 II c by
1,000 I v effected by the labourers of I), it is made to serve as an
additional means of production in I itself. It cannot perform this function
simultaneously in I and II. The capitalist cannot spend the value of his
surplus-product for articles of consumption and at the same time
consume the surplus-product itself productively, i.e., incorporate it in his
productive capital. Instead of 2,000 I(v+s), only 1,500, namely (1,000 v
+ 500 s) I, are therefore exchangeable for 2,000 II c ; 500 II c cannot be
reconverted from the commodity-form into productive (constant) capital II. 

Hence there would be an over-production in II, exactly equal in 
volume to the expansion of production in I. This over-production in II
might react to such an extent on I that even the reflux of the 1,000
spent by the labourers of I for articles of consumption of II might take
place but partially, so that these 1,000 would not return to the hands of
capitalists I in the form of variable money-capital. These capitalists
would thus find themselves hampered even in reproduction on an
unchanging scale, and this by the bare attempt to expand it. And in this
connection it must be taken into consideration that in I only simple
reproduction had actually taken place and that its elements, as
represented in our scheme, are only differently grouped with a view to
expansion in the future, say, next year.

One might attempt to circumvent this difficulty in the following way:
Far from being over-production, the 500 II c which are kept in stock by
the capitalists and cannot be immediately converted into productive
capital represent, on the contrary, a necessary element of reproduction,
which we have so far neglected. We have seen that a money-supply
must be accumulated at many points, hence money must be withdrawn
from circulation, partly for the purpose of making it possible to form new
money-capital in I, and partly to hold fast temporarily the value of the
gradually depreciating fixed capital in the form of money. But since we
placed all money and commodities from the very start exclusively into
the hands of capitalists I and II when we drew up our scheme and since
neither merchants, nor money-changers, nor bankers, nor merely
consuming and not directly producing classes exist here, it follows that
the constant formation of commodity stores in the hands of their
respective producers is here indispensable to keep the machinery of
reproduction going. The 500 II c held in stock by capitalists II therefore
represent the commodity-supply of articles of consumption which
ensures the continuity of the process of consumption implied in
reproduction, here meaning the passage of one year to the next. The
consumption-fund, which is as yet in the hands of its sellers who are at
the same time its producers, cannot fall one year to the point of zero in
order to begin the next with zero, any more than such a thing can take
place in the transition from today to tomorrow. Since such supplies of
commodities must constantly be built up anew, though varying in
volume, our capitalist producers II must have a reserve money-capital,
which enables them to continue their process of production although one
portion of their productive capital is temporarily tied up in the shape of
commodities. Our assumption is that they combine the whole business
of trading with that of producing. Hence they must also have at their
disposal the additional money-capital, which is in the hands of the
merchants when the individual functions in the process of reproduction
are separated and distributed among the various kinds of capitalists.

To this one may object:

1) That the forming of such supplies and the
necessity of doing so applies to all capitalists, those of I as well as of II.
Considered as mere sellers of commodities, they differ only in that they
sell different kinds of commodities. A supply of commodities II implies a
previous supply of commodities I. If we neglect this supply on one side,
we must also do so on the other. But if we take them into account on
both sides, the problem is not altered in any way.

2) Just as a certain year closes on the part of II with a supply of
commodities for the following year, so it was opened with a supply of
commodities on the same part, taken over from the preceding year. In
an analysis of annual reproduction, reduced to its most abstract form,
we must therefore strike it out in both cases. If we leave to the given
year its entire production, including the commodity-supply to be yielded
up for next year, and simultaneously take from it the supply of
commodities transferred to it from the preceding year, we have before us
the actual aggregate product of an average year as the subject of our
analysis.

3) The simple circumstance that in the analysis of simple
reproduction we did not stumble across the difficulty which is now to be
surmounted proves that we are confronted by a specific phenomenon
due solely to the different grouping (with reference to reproduction) of
elements I, a changed grouping without which reproduction on an
extended scale cannot take place at all.