IV. Exchange within Department II.

Necessities of Life and Articles of Luxury

Of the value of the commodity-product of department II there still
remain to be studied the constituents v plus s. This analysis has nothing
to do with the most important question which occupies our attention
here, namely to what extent the division of the value of every individual
capitalist commodity-product into c + v + s ; even if brought about by
different forms of appearance ; applies also to the value of the total
annual product. This question finds its answers on the one hand in the
exchange of I(v + s) for IIc, and on the other hand in the investigation, to be made later, of the reproduction of I in the annual product of I. Since
II(v + s) exists in the bodily form of articles of consumption; since the
variable capital advanced to the labourers in payment of their labour-power
must generally speaking be spent by them for articles of
consumption; and since the s-portion of the value of commodities, on
the assumption of simple reproduction, is practically spent as revenue
for articles of consumption, it is prima facie evident that the labourers II
buy back, with the wages received from the capitalists II, a portion of
their own product, corresponding to the amount of the money-value
received as wages. Thereby the capitalist class II reconverts the money-capital
advanced by it in the payment of labour-power into the form of
money. It is quite the same as if it had paid the labourers in mere value
tokens. As soon as the labourers would realise these value tokens by the
purchase of a part of the commodities produced by them but belonging
to the capitalists, these tokens would return into the hands of the
capitalists. Only, these tokens do not merely represent value but possess
it, in golden or silver embodiment. We shall analyse in greater detail
later on this sort of reflux of variable capital advanced in the form of
money by means of a process in which the working-class appears as the
purchaser and the capitalist class as the seller. Here however a different
point is at issue, which must be discussed in connection with this return
of the variable capital to its point of departure.

Category II of the annual production of commodities consists of a
great variety of branches of production, which may, however, be divided
into two great sub-divisions by their products.

a) Articles of consumption, which enter into the consumption of the
working-class, and, to the extent that they are necessities of life ; even if
frequently different in quality and value from those of the labourers ; 
also form a portion of the consumption of the capitalist class. For our
purposes we may call this entire sub-division consumer necessities,
regardless of whether such a product as tobacco is really a consumer
necessity from the physiological point of view. It suffices that it is
habitually such.

b) Articles of luxury, which enter into the consumption of only the
capitalist class and can therefore be exchanged only for spent surplus-value,
which never falls to the share of the labourer.

As far as the first category is concerned it is obvious that the variable
capital advanced in the production of the commodities belonging in it
must flow back in money-form directly to that portion of the capitalist
class II (i.e., the capitalists IIa) who have produced these necessities of
life. They sell them to their own labourers to the amount of the variable
capital paid to them in wages. This reflux is direct so far as this entire
sub-division a of capitalist class II is concerned, no matter how numerous
the transactions may be between the capitalists of the various pertinent
branches of industry, by means of which the returning variable capital is
distributed pro rata. These are processes of circulation, whose means of
circulation are supplied directly by the money expended by the
labourers. It is different, however, with sub-division IIb. The entire
portion of the value produced in this sub-division, IIb(v + s), exists in the
bodily form of articles of luxury, i.e., articles which the labouring class
can buy no more than it can buy commodity-value I existing in the form
of means of production, notwithstanding the fact that both the articles of
luxury and the means of production are the products of these labourers.

Hence the reflux by which the variable capital advanced in this subdivision
returns to the capitalist producers in its money-form cannot be
direct but must be mediated, as in the case of Iv.

Let us assume for instance that v = 500 and s = 500, as they did in
the case of the entire class II; but that the variable capital and the
corresponding surplus-value are distributed as follows:

Sub-division a, Necessities of Life: v = 400; s = 400; hence a
quantity of commodities in consumer necessities of the value of 400v +
400s = 800, or IIa (400v + 400s).

Sub-division b, Articles of Luxury: of the value of 100v + 100a = 200,
or IIb (100v + 100s).

The labourers of IIb have received 100 in money as payment for their
labour-power, or say &pound;100. With this money they buy articles of
consumption from capitalists IIa to the same amount. This class of
capitalists buys with the same money &pound;100 worth of the IIb
commodities, and in this way the variable capital of capitalists IIb flows
back to them in the form of money.

In IIa there are available once more 400v in money, in the hands of
the capitalists, obtained by exchange with their own labourers. Besides,
a fourth of the part of the product representing surplus-value has been
transferred to the labourers of IIb, and in exchange IIb (100v) have been
received in the form of articles of luxury.

Now, assuming that the capitalists of IIa and IIb divide the
expenditure of their revenue in the same proportion between necessities
of life and luxuries ; three-fifths for necessities for instance and two-fifths
for luxuries ; the capitalists of sub-class IIa will spend three-fifths of
their revenue from surplus-value, amounting to 400s, or 240, for their
own products, necessities of life, and two-fifths, or 160, for articles of
luxury. The capitalists of sub-class IIb will divide their surplus-value of
100s in the same way: three-fifths, or 60, for necessities, and two-fifths,
or 40, for articles of luxury, the latter being produced and exchanged in
their own sub-class.

The 160 in articles of luxury received by (IIa)s pass into the hands of
the IIa capitalists in the following manner: As we have seen, 100 of the
(IIa) 400s were exchanged in the form of necessities of life for an equal
amount of (IIb)v, which exists as articles of luxury, and another 60,
consisting of necessities of life, for (IIb) 60s, consisting of luxuries. The
total calculation then stands as follows:

IIa: 400v + 400s; IIb: 100v + 100s

1) 400v (a) are consumed by the labourers of IIa, a part of whose
product (necessities of life) they form. The labourers buy them from the
capitalist producers of their own sub-division. These capitalists thereby
recover &pound;400 in money, which is the value of their variable capital of
400 paid by them to these same labourers as wages. They can now
once more buy labour-power with it.

2) A part of the 400s (a), equal to the 100v (b), one-fourth of the surplus-value (a), is realised in luxuries in the following way: The
labourers (b) received from the capitalists of their sub-division (b) &pound;100
in wages. With this amount they buy one-fourth of the surplus-value (a),
i.e., commodities consisting of necessities of life. With this money the
capitalists of (a) buy articles of luxury to the same amount, which equals
100v (b), or one half of the entire output of luxuries. In this way the b
capitalists get back their variable capital in the form of money and are
enabled to resume reproduction by again purchasing labour-power, since
the entire constant capital of the whole category II has already been
replaced by the exchange of I(v + s) for IIc. The labour-power of the luxury workers is therefore saleable anew only because the part of their own
product created as an equivalent for their wages is drawn by capitalists
IIa into their consumption-fund, is turned into money. (The same applies
to the sale of the labour-power of I, since the II for which I(v + s) is
exchanged, consists of both articles of luxury and necessities of life, and
that which is renewed by means of I(v + s) constitutes the means of
production of both luxuries and necessities.)

3) We now come to the exchange between a and b, which is merely
exchange between the capitalists of the two sub-divisions. So far we
have disposed of the variable capital (400v) and part of the surplus-value
(100s) in a, and the variable capital (100v) in b. We have
furthermore assumed that the average proportion of the expenditure of
the capitalist revenue was in both classes two-fifths for luxuries and
three-fifths for necessities. Apart from the 100 already expended for
luxuries, the entire subdivision a still has to be allotted 60 for luxuries,
and b has proportionately to be allotted 40.

(IIa)s is then divided into 240 for necessities and 160 for luxuries, or
240 + 160 = 400, (IIa).

(IIb)s is divided into 60 for necessities and 40 for luxuries; 60 + 40
= 100, (IIb). The last 40 are consumed by this class out of its own
product (two-fifths of its surplus-value); the 60 in necessities are
obtained by this class through the exchange of 60 of its surplus-value for
60, (a).

We have, then, for the entire capitalist class II the following (v plus s
in sub-division [a] consisting of necessities, in [b] of luxuries):
IIa (400v + 400s) + IIb (100v + 100s) = 1,000; by this movement there is thus realised: 500v (a + b) [realised in 400v (a) and 100s (a)] + 500s (a + b) [realised in 300s (a) + 100v (b) + 100s (b)] =1,000.
For a and b, each considered by itself, we obtain the following realisation:

v
 
s

a)

 + 

 = 
800

400v(a)
 
240s(a) + 100v(b) + 60s(b)

v
 
s
=
200

b)

 + 

 ... 

100v(a)
 
60s(a) + 40s(b)
 
1000

If, for the sake of simplicity, we assume the same proportion between the variable and constant capital (which, by the way, is not at all necessary), we obtain for 400v (a) a constant capital of 1,600, and for 100v (b) a constant capital of 400. We then have the following two subdivisions, a and b, in II:

IIa) 1,600c + 400v + 400s = 2,400

IIb) 400c + 100v + 100s = 600

adding up to

2,000c + 500v + 500s = 3,000

Accordingly, 1,600 of the 2,000 IIc in articles of consumption, which are exchanged for 2,000 I(v + s), are exchanged for means of production of necessities of life and 400 for means of production of luxuries.

The 2,000 I(v + s) would therefore break up into (800v + 800s) I for a, equal to 1,600 means of production of necessities of life, and (200v + 200s) I for b, equal to 400 means of production of luxuries.

A considerable part of the instruments of labour as such, as well as of the raw and auxiliary materials, etc., is the same for both departments. But so far as the exchange of the various portions of value of the total product I(v + s) is concerned, such a division would be wholly immaterial. Both the above 800v of I and the 200v of I are realised because the wages are spent for articles of consumption 1,000 IIc; hence the money-capital
advanced for this purpose is distributed evenly on its return
among the capitalist producers of I, their advanced variable capital is
replaced pro rata in money. On the other hand, so far as the realisation
of the 1,000 Is is concerned, the capitalists will here likewise draw
uniformly (in proportion to the magnitude of their s) 600 IIa and 400 IIb
in means of consumption out of the entire second half of IIc, equal to
1,000; consequently those who replace the constant capital of IIa will
draw.

480 (three-fifths) out of 600c (IIa) and 320 (two-fifths) out of 400c (IIb), a total of 800; those who replace the constant capital of IIb will
draw.

120 (three-fifths) out of 600c (IIa) and 80 (two-fifths) out of 400c (IIb), which equals 200. Grand total, 1,000.

What is arbitrary here is the ratio of the variable to the constant
capital of both I and II and so is the identity of this ratio for I and II and
their sub-divisions. As for this identity, it has been assumed here merely
for the sake of simplification, and it would not alter in any way the
conditions of the problem and its solution if we were to assume different
proportions. However, the necessary result of all this, on the assumption
of simple reproduction, is the following.

1) That the new value created by the labour of one year (divisible into
v + s) in the bodily form of means of production is equal to the value of
the constant capital c contained in the value of the product created by
the other part of the annual labour and reproduced in the form of articles
of consumption. If it were smaller than IIc, it would be impossible for II
to replace its constant capital entirely; if it were greater, a surplus would
remain unused. In either case, the assumption of simple reproduction
would be violated.

2) That in the case of annual product which is reproduced in the form
of articles of consumption, the variable capital v advanced in the form of
money can be realised by its recipients, inasmuch as they are labourers
producing luxuries, only in that portion of the necessities of life which
embodies for their capitalist producers prima facie their surplus-value;
hence that v, laid out in the production of luxuries, is equal in value to a
corresponding portion of s produced in the form of necessities of life, and
hence must be smaller than the whole of this s, namely (IIa)s, and that
the variable capital advanced by the capitalist producers of luxuries
returns to them in the form of money only by means of the realisation of
that v in this portion of s. This phenomenon is quite analogous to the
realisation of I(v + s) in IIc, except that in the second case (IIb)v realizes itself in a part of (IIa)s of the same value. These proportions remain qualitatively determinant in every distribution of the total annual product, since it actually enters into the process of the annual reproduction
brought about by circulation. I(v + s) can be realised only in IIc, just as IIc can only be renewed in function as a component part of productive capital by means of this realisation; in the same way, (IIb)v can be realised only in a portion of (IIa)s and (IIb)v can only thus be reconverted into the form of money-capital. It goes without saying that this applies only to the extent that it all is really a result of the process of reproduction itself, i.e., to the extent that the capitalists of IIb, for
instance, do not obtain money-capital for v on credit from others.
Quantitatively however the exchanges of the various portions of the
annual product can take place in the proportions indicated above only so
long as the scale and value-relations in production remain stationary and
so long as these strict relations are not altered by foreign commerce.

Now, if we were to say after the manner of Adam Smith that I(v + s)
resolve themselves into IIc, and IIc resolves itself into I(v + s), or, as he used to say more frequently and still more absurdly, I(v + s) constitute component parts of the price (or "value in exchange," as he has it) of II and II constitutes the entire component part of the value of I(v + s), then one could and should likewise say that (IIb)v resolves itself into (IIa)s, or
(IIa)s into (IIb)v, or (IIb)v forms a component part of the surplus-value of IIa, and, vice versa, the surplus-value thus resolves itself into wages, or into variable capital, and the variable capital forms a "component part" of the surplus-value. This absurdity is indeed found in Adam Smith,
since with him wages are determined by the value of the necessities of
life, and these commodity-values in their turn by the value of the wages
(variable capital) and surplus-value contained in them. He is so
absorbed in the fractional parts into which the value-product of one
working-day is divided on the basis of capitalism ; namely into v plus
s ; that he quite forgets that it is immaterial in simple commodity
exchange whether the equivalents existing in various bodily forms
consist of paid or unpaid labour, since their production costs in either
case the same amount of labour; and that it is also immaterial whether
the commodity of A is a means of production and that of B an article of
consumption and whether one commodity has to serve as a component
part of capital after its sale while another passes into the consumption-fund
and, secundum Adam, is consumed as revenue. The use to which
the individual buyer puts his commodity does not come within the scope
of commodity-exchange, the sphere of circulation, and does not affect
the value of the commodity. This is in no wise altered by the fact that in
the analysis of the circulation of the total annual social product, the
definite use for which it is intended, the factor of consumption of the
various component parts of that product, must be taken into consideration.

In the exchange established above of (IIb)v for a portion of (IIa)s of the same value, and in the further exchanges between (IIa), and (IIb), it is by no means assumed that either the individual capitalists of IIa and
IIb or their respective totalities divide their surplus-value in the same
proportion between necessary articles of consumption and articles of
luxury. The one may spend more on this consumption, the other more
on that. On the basis of simple reproduction it is merely assumed that a
sum of values equal to the entire surplus-value is realised in the
consumption-fund. The limits are thus given. Within each department
the one may spend more in a, the other in b. But this may compensate
itself mutually, so that the capitalist groups of a and b, taken as a
whole, each participate in the same proportion in both. The value-relations ; 
the proportional shares of the two kinds of producers, a and b
in the total value of product II ; consequently also a definite quantitative
relation between the branches of production supplying those products ; 
are however necessarily given in each concrete case; only the proportion
chosen as an illustration is a hypothetical one. It would not alter the
qualitative aspects if another illustration were selected; only the
quantitative determinations would be altered. But if on account of any
circumstances there arises an actual change in the relative magnitude of
a and b, the conditions of simple reproduction would also change
accordingly.

Since (IIb)v is realised in an equivalent part of (IIa)s, it follows that in proportion as the luxury part of the annual product grows, as therefore
an increasing share of the labour-power is absorbed in the production of
luxuries, the reconversion of the variable capital advanced in (IIb)v
into money-capital functioning anew as the money-form of the variable
capital, and thereby the existence and reproduction of the part of the
working-class employed in IIb ; the supply to them of consumer
necessities ; depends upon the prodigality of the capitalist class, upon
the exchange of a considerable portion of their surplus-value for articles
of luxury.

Every crisis at once lessens the consumption of luxuries. It retards,
delays the reconversion of (IIb)v into money-capital, permitting it only
partially and thus throwing a certain number of the labourers employed
in the production of luxuries out of work, while on the other hand it thus
clogs the sale of consumer necessities and reduces it. And this without
mentioning the unproductive labourers who are dismissed at the same
time, labourers who receive for their services a portion of the capitalists'
luxury expense fund (these labourers are themselves pro tanto luxuries),
and who take part to a very considerable extent in the consumption of
the necessities of life, etc. The reverse takes place in periods of
prosperity, particularly during the times of bogus prosperity, in which the
relative value of money, expressed in commodities, decreases also for
other reasons (without any actual revolution in values), so that the prices
of commodities rise independently of their own values. It is not alone the
consumption of necessities of life which increases. The working-class
(now actively reinforced by its entire reserve army) also enjoys momentarily
articles of luxury ordinarily beyond its reach, and those articles
which at other times constitute for the greater part consumer
"necessities" only for the capitalist class. This on its part calls forth a
rise in prices.

It is sheer tautology to say that crises are caused by the scarcity of
effective consumption, or of effective consumers. The capitalist system
does not know any other modes of consumption than effective ones,
except that of sub forma pauperis or of the swindler. That commodities
are unsaleable means only that no effective purchasers have been found
for them, i.e., consumers (since commodities are bought in the final
analysis for productive or individual consumption). But if one were to
attempt to give this tautology the semblance of a profounder justification
by saying that the working-class receives too small a portion of its own
product and the evil would be remedied as soon as it receives a larger
share of it and its wages increase in consequence, one could only
remark that crises are always prepared by precisely a period in which
wages rise generally and the working-class actually gets a larger share of
that part of the annual product which is intended for consumption. From
the point of view of these advocates of sound and "simple" (!) common
sense, such a period should rather remove the crisis. It appears, then,
that capitalist production comprises conditions independent of good or
bad will, conditions which permit the working-class to enjoy that relative
prosperity only momentarily, and at that always only as the harbinger of
a coming crisis. [Ad notam for possible followers of the Rodbertian theory of crises.; F.E.]

We saw a while ago that the proportion between the production of
consumer necessities and that of luxuries requires the division of II(v + s)
between IIa and IIb, and thus of IIc between (IIa)c and (IIb)c. Hence this division affects the character and the quantitative relations of production
to their very roots, and is an essential determining factor of its general
structure.

Simple reproduction is essentially directed toward consumption as an
end, although the grabbing of surplus-value appears as the compelling
motive of the individual capitalists; but surplus-value, whatever its
relative magnitude may be, is after all supposed to serve here only for
the individual consumption of the capitalist.

As simple reproduction is a part, and the most important one at that,
of all annual reproduction on an extended scale, this motive remains as
an accompaniment of and contrast to the self-enrichment motive as
such. In reality the matter is more complicated, because partners in the
loot ; the surplus-value of the capitalist ; figure as consumers independent of him.