III. Schematic Presentation of Accumulation

We shall now study reproduction according to the following scheme.

Scheme a)

I. 4,000c + 1,000v + 1,000s

= 6,000

II. 1,500c + 376v + 376s

= 2,252

= 8,252 Total

We note in the first place that the sum total of the annual social
product, or 8,252, is smaller than that of the first scheme, where it was
9,000. We might just as well assume a much larger sum, for instance
one ten times larger. We have chosen a smaller sum than in our scheme
I in order to make it conspicuously clear that reproduction on an
enlarged scale (which is here regarded merely as production carried on
with a larger investment of capital) has nothing to do with the absolute
volume of the product, that for a given quantity of commodities it implies
merely a different arrangement or a different definition of the functions of
the various elements of a given product, so that it is but a simple
reproduction so far as the value of the product is concerned. It is not the
quantity but the qualitative determination of the given elements of
simple reproduction which is changed, and this change is the material
premise of a subsequent reproduction on an extended scale. [1]

We might vary the scheme by changing the ratio between the variable
and constant capital. For instance as follows:

Scheme b)

I. 4,000c + 875v + 875s

= 5,750

II. 1,750c + 376v + 376s

= 2,502

= 8,252 Total

This scheme seems arranged for reproduction on a simple scale, the
surplus-value being entirely consumed as revenue and not accumulated.
In either case, both a) and b), we have an annual product of the same
magnitude of value, only under b) functionally its elements are grouped in such a way that reproduction is resumed on the same scale, while under a) the functional
grouping forms the material basis of reproduction on an extended scale.
Under b) (875v + 875s) I, or 1,750 I(v + s), are exchanged without any surplus for 1,750 IIc while under a) the exchange of (1,000v + 1,000s) I, equal to 2,000 I(v + s), for 1,000 IIc leaves a surplus of 500 Is for accumulation in class I.

Now let us analyse scheme a) more closely. Let us suppose that both
I and II accumulate one half of their surplus-value, that is to say, convert
it into an element of additional capital, instead of spending it as revenue.
As one half of 1,000 Is, or 500, are to be accumulated in one form or
another, invested as additional money-capital, i.e., converted into
additional productive capital, only (1,000v + 500s) I are spent as revenue. Hence only 1,500 figures here as the normal size of IIc. We
need not further examine the exchange between 1,500 I(v + s) and 1,500
IIc, because this has already been done under the head of process of
simple reproduction. Nor does 4,000 Ic require any attention, since its
re-arrangement for the newly commencing reproduction (which this time
will occur on an extended scale) was likewise discussed as a process of
simple reproduction.

The only thing that remains to be examined by us is 500 Is and (376v + 376s) II, inasmuch as it is a matter on the one hand of the internal relations of both I and II and on the other of the movement between
them. Since we have assumed that in II likewise one half of the surplus-value
is to be accumulated, 188 are to be converted here into capital, of
which one-fifth, or 47, or, to round it off, 48, are to be variable
capital, so that 140 remain to be converted into constant capital.

Here we come across a new problem, whose very existence must
appear strange to the current view that commodities of one kind are
exchanged for commodities of another kind, or commodities for money
and the same money again for commodities of another kind. The 140
IIs can be converted into productive capital only by replacing them with
commodities of Is of the same value. It is a matter of course that that
portion of Is which must be exchanged for IIs must consist of means of production, which may enter either into the production of both I and II,
or exclusively into that of II. This replacement can be made feasible only
by means of a one-sided purchase on the part of II, as the entire surplus-product
of 500 Is, which we still have to examine, is to serve the
purposes of accumulation within I, hence cannot be exchanged for
commodities II; in other words, it cannot be simultaneously accumulated
and consumed by I. Therefore II must buy 140 Is for cash without
recovering this money by a subsequent sale of its commodities to I. And
this is a process which is continually repeating itself in every new annual
production, so far as it is reproduction on an extended scale. Where in II
is the source of the money for this?

It would rather seem that II is a very unprofitable field for the
formation of new money-capital which accompanies actual accumulation
and necessitates it under capitalist production, and which at first
actually presents itself as simple hoarding.

We have first 376 IIv. The money-capital of 376, advanced in labour-power,
continually returns through the purchase of commodities II as
variable capital in money-form to capitalist II. This constant repetition of
departure from and return to the starting-point, the pocket of the
capitalist, does not add in any way to the money roving over this circuit.
This, then, is not a source of the accumulation of money. Nor can this
money be withdrawn from circulation in order to form hoarded, virtually
new, money-capital.

But stop! Isn't there a chance here to make a little profit?

We must not forget that class II has this advantage over class I, that
its labourers have to buy back from it the commodities produced by
themselves. Class II is a buyer of labour-power and at the same time a
seller of the commodities to the owners of the labour-power employed by
it. Class II can therefore:

1) ; and this it shares with the capitalists of class I ; simply depress
wages below their normal average level. By this means a portion of the
money functioning as the money-form of variable capital is released, and
if this process is continually repeated, it might become a normal source
of hoarding, and thus of virtually additional money-capital in class II. Of
course we are not referring to a casual swindle profit here, since we are
treating of a normal formation of capital. But it must not be forgotten
that the normal wages actually paid (which ceteris paribus determine
the magnitude of the variable capital) are not paid by the capitalists but
of the goodness of their hearts, but must he paid under given relations.
This eliminates the above method of explanation. If we assume that
376v is the variable capital to be laid out by class II, we have no right
suddenly to sneak in the hypothesis that it may pay only 350v instead of
376v, merely to elucidate a problem that has newly arisen.

2) On the other hand class II, taken as a whole, has the above-mentioned
advantage over I that it is at the same time a buyer of labour-power
and a seller of its commodities to its own labourers. Every
industrial country (for instance Britain and the U.S.A.) furnishes the
most tangible proofs of the way in which this advantage may be
exploited ; by paying nominally the normal wages but grabbing, alias
stealing, back part of them without an equivalent in commodities; by
accomplishing the same thing either through the truck system or through
a falsification of the medium of circulation (perhaps in a way too elusive
for the law). (Take this opportunity to expatiate on this idea with some
appropriate examples.) This is the same operation as under 1), only
disguised and carried out by a detour. Therefore it must likewise be
rejected, the same as the other. We are dealing here with actually paid,
not nominally paid wages.

We see that in an objective analysis of the mechanism of capitalism
certain stains still sticking to it with extraordinary tenacity cannot be
used as a subterfuge to get over some theoretical difficulties. But strange
to say, the great majority of my bourgeois critics upbraid me as though I
have wronged the capitalists by assuming, for instance in Book I of
Capital, that the capitalist pays labour-power at its real value, a thing
which he mostly does not do! (Here, exercising some of the magnanimity
attributed to me, it would be appropriate to quote Schäffle.)

So with the 376 IIv we cannot get any nearer the goal we have
mentioned.

But the 376 IIv seem to be in a still more precarious position. Here
only capitalists of the same class, mutually buying and selling the
articles of consumption they produced, confront one another. The money
required for these transactions functions only as a medium of circulation
and in the normal course of things must flow back to the interested
parties in the same portion in which they advanced it to the circulation,
in order to cover the same route over and over again.

There seem to be only two ways by which this money can be
withdrawn from circulation to form virtually additional money-capital.
Either one part of capitalists II cheats the other and thus robs them of
their money. We know that no preliminary expansion of the circulating
medium is necessary for the formation of new money-capital. All that is
necessary is that the money should be withdrawn from circulation by
certain parties and hoarded. It would not alter the case if this money
were stolen, so that the formation of additional money-capital by one
part of capitalists II would entail a positive loss of money by another
part. The cheated capitalists II would have to live a little less gaily, that
would be all.

Or a part of II represented by necessities of life is directly converted
into new variable capital within department II. How that is done we shall
examine at the close of this chapter (under No. IV).