XIII. Destutt De Tracy's Theory of Reproduction

Let us illustrate the confused and at the same time boastful
thoughtlessness of political economists analysing social reproduction,
with the example of the great logician Destutt de Tracy (Vol. 1, Ch. V,
Note), whom even Ricardo took seriously and called a very distinguished
writer. (Principles, p. 333.)

This "distinguished writer" gives the following explanations
concerning the entire process of social reproduction and circulation:

"I shall be asked how these industrial entrepreneurs can make such large profits and out of whom they can draw them. I reply that they do
so by selling everything which they produce for more than it has cost to
produce; and that they sell:

"1) to one another for the entire portion of their consumption
intended for the satisfaction of their needs, which they pay with a
portion of their profits;

"2) to the wage-labourers, both those whom they pay and those
whom the idle capitalists pay; from these wage-labourers they thus
extract their entire wages except perhaps their small savings;

"3) to the idle capitalists who pay them with the portion of their
revenue which they have not yet given to the wage-labourers employed
by them directly; so that the entire rent which they pay them annually
flows back to them in this way or the other." (Destutt de Tracy, Traité de la volonté et de ses effets, Paris, 1826, p. 239.)

In other words, the capitalists enrich themselves by mutually getting
the best of one another in the exchange of that portion of their surplus-value
which they set apart for their individual consumption or consume
as revenue. For instance, if this portion of their surplus-value or of their
profits is equal to £400, this sum of £400 is supposed to grow to, say,
£500 by each stockholder of the £400 selling his share to another 25
per cent in excess. But since all do the same, the result will be the same
as if they had sold to one another at the real values. They merely need
£500 in money for the circulation of commodities worth £400, and this
would seem to be rather a method of impoverishing than of enriching
themselves since it compels them to keep a large portion of their total
wealth unproductively in the useless form of circulation media. The
whole thing boils down to this, that despite the all-round nominal rise in
the price of their commodities the capitalist class has only £400 worth
of commodities to divide among themselves for their individual
consumption, but that they do one another the favour of circulating
£400 worth of commodities by means of a quantity of money which is
required to circulate £500 worth of commodities.

And this quite aside from the fact that a "portion of their profits," and
therefore in general a supply of commodities in which there exist profits,
is here assumed. But Destutt undertook precisely to tell us where those
profits come from. The quantity of money required to circulate the profit
is a very subordinate question. The quantity of commodities in which the
profit is represented seems to have its origin in the circumstance that the
capitalists not only sell these commodities to one another, although even
this much is quite fine and profound, but sell them to one another at
prices which are too high. So we now know one source of the
enrichment of the capitalists. It is on a par with the secret of the
"Entspektor Bräsig""
[47] that the great poverty is due to the great "pauvreté."

2) The same capitalists furthermore sell

"to the wage-labourers, both
those whom they pay and those whom the idle capitalists pay; from
these wage-labourers they thus recover their entire wages, except
perhaps their small savings."

According to Monsieur Destutt, then, the reflux of the money-capital,
the form in which the capitalists have advanced wages to the labourers,
is the second source of the enrichment of these capitalists.
If therefore the capitalists paid for instance £100 to their labourers as
wages and if these same labourers then buy from the same capitalists
commodities of this same value, of £100, so that the sum of £100
which the capitalists had advanced as buyers of labour-power returns to
the capitalists when they sell to the labourers £100 worth of
commodities, the capitalists get richer thereby. It would appear to
anyone endowed with ordinary common sense that they only find
themselves once more in possession of their £100, which they owned
before this procedure. At the beginning of the procedure they have £100
in money. For these £100 they buy labour-power. The labour bought
produces for these £100 in money commodities of a value which, so far
as we now know, amounts to £100. By selling the £100 worth of
commodities to their labourers the capitalists recover £100 in money.
The capitalists then have once more £100 in money, and the labourers
have £100 worth of commodities which they have themselves produced.
It is hard to understand how that can make the capitalists any richer. If
the £100 in money did not flow back to them they would first have to
pay to the labourers £100 in money for their labour and secondly to give
them the product of this labour, £100 worth of articles of consumption,
for nothing. The reflux of this money might therefore at best explain why
the capitalists do not get poorer by this transaction, but by no means
why they get richer by it.

To be sure it is another question how the capitalists came into
possession of the £100 and why the labourers, instead of producing
commodities for their own account, are compelled to exchange their
labour-power for these £100. But this, for a thinker of Destutt's calibre,
is self-explanatory.

Destutt himself is not quite satisfied with the solution. After all, he
did not tell us that one gets richer by spending a sum of money, a
hundred pounds, and then taking in again a sum of money amounting to
£100; hence, by the reflux of £100 in money, which merely shows why
the £100 in money do not get lost. He tells us that the capitalists get
richer

"by selling everything which they produce for more than it has
cost to produce."

Consequently the capitalists must get richer also in their transactions
with the labourers by selling to them too dear. Very well!

"They pay wages ... and all this flows back to them through the expenditures of all these people who pay them more" [for the products] "than they cost them [the capitalists] in wages." (Ibid., p. 240.)

In other words, the capitalists pay £100 in wages to the labourers, and then they sell to these labourers their own product at £120, so that they not only recover
their £100 but also gain £20? That is impossible. The labourers can pay
only with the money which they have received in the form of wages. If
they get £100 in wages from the capitalists they can buy only £100
worth, not £120 worth. So this will not work. But there is still another
way. The labourers buy from the capitalists commodities for £100, but
actually receive commodities worth only £80. Then they are absolutely
cheated out of £20. And the capitalist has absolutely gained £20,
because he actually paid for the labour-power 20 per cent less than its
value, or cut nominal wages 20 per cent by a circuitous route.

The capitalist class would accomplish the same end if it paid the
labourers at the start only £80 in wages and afterwards gave them for
these £80 in money actually £80 worth of commodities. This seems to
be the normal way, considering the class of capitalists as a whole, for
according to Monsieur Destutt himself the labouring class must receive a
"sufficient wage" (p. 219), since their wages must at least be adequate
to maintain their existence and capacity to work,""to procure the barest
subsistence." (p. 180). If the labourers do not receive such sufficient
wages, that means, according to the same Destutt, "the death of
industry" (p. 208), which does not seem therefore to be a way in which
the capitalists can get richer. But whatever may be the scale of wages
paid by the capitalists to the working-class, they have a definite value,
e.g., £80. If the capitalist class pays the labourers £80, then it has to
supply them with commodities worth £80 for these £80 and the reflux
of the £80 does not enrich it. If it pays them £100 in money, and sells
them £80 worth of commodities for £100 it pays them in money 25 per
cent more than their normal wage and supplies them in return with 25
per cent less in commodities.

In other words, the fund from which the capitalist class in general
derives its profits is supposedly made up of deductions from the normal
wages by paying less than its value for labour-power, i.e., less than the
value of the means of subsistence required for their normal reproduction
as wage-labourers. If therefore normal wages were paid, which is
supposed to be the case according to Destutt, there could be no profit
fund for either the industrial or the idle capitalists.

Hence Destutt should have reduced the entire secret of how the
capitalist class gets richer to the following: by a deduction from wages.
In that case the other surplus-value funds, which he mentions under 1)
and 3), would not exist.

Hence in all countries, in which the money wages of the labourers
should be reduced to the value of the articles of consumption necessary
for their subsistence as a class, there would be no consumption-fund
and no accumulation-fund for the capitalists, and hence also no
existence-fund for the capitalist class, and hence also no capitalist class.
And, according to Destutt, this should be the case in all wealthy and
developed countries with an old civilisation, for in them,

"in our ancient societies, the fund for the maintenance of wage-labourers is ... an almost constant magnitude." (Ibid., p. 202.)

Even with a deduction from the wages, the capitalist does not enrich
himself by first paying the labourer £100 in money and then supplying
him with £80 worth of commodities for these £100, thus actually
circulating £80 worth of commodities by means of £100, an excess of
25 per cent. The capitalist gets richer by appropriating, besides the
surplus-value ; that portion of the product in which surplus-value is
represented ; 25 per cent of that portion of the product which the
labourer should receive in the form of wages. The capitalist class would
not gain anything by the silly method Destutt conceived. It pays £100 in
wages and gives back to the labourer for these £100 £80 worth of his
own product. But in the next transaction it must again advance £100 for
the same procedure. It would thus be indulging in the useless sport of
advancing £100 in money and giving in exchange £80 in commodities,
instead of advancing £80 in money and supplying in exchange for it £80
in commodities. That is to say, it would be continually advancing to no
purpose a money-capital which is 25 per cent in excess of that required
for the circulation of its variable capital, which is a very peculiar method
of getting rich.

3) Finally the capitalist class sells

"to the idle capitalists, who pay
them with the portion of their revenue which they have not yet given to
the wage-labourers employed by them directly; so that the entire rent,
which they pay them (the idle ones) annually, flows back to them in this
way or the other."

We have seen above that the industrial capitalists

"pay with a portion of their profits the entire portion of their consumption intended for the satisfaction of their needs."

Take it, then, that their profits are equal to £200. And let them use up, say, £100 of this in their individual consumption. But the other half, or £100, does not belong to them; it belongs to the idle capitalists, i.e., to those who receive the ground-rent, and to capitalists who lend money on interest. So they have to pay £100 to these gentry. Let us assume that these gentry need £80 of this money
for their individual consumption, and £20 for the hire of servants, etc.
With those £80 they buy articles of consumption from the industrial
capitalists. Thus while these capitalists part with commodities to the
value of £80, they receive back £80 in money, or four-fifths of the £100 paid by them to the idle capitalists under the name of rent, interest, etc.

Furthermore the servant class, the direct wage-labourers of the idle
capitalists, have received £20 from their masters. These servants
likewise buy articles of consumption from the industrial capitalists to the
amount of £20. In this way, while parting with commodities worth £20,
these capitalists have £20 in money flow back to them, the last fifth of
the £100 which they paid to the idle capitalists for rent, interest, etc.
At the close of the transaction the industrial capitalists have
recovered in money the £100 which they remitted to the idle capitalists
in payment of rent, interest, etc. But one half of their surplus-product,
equal to £100, passed meanwhile from their hands into the
consumption-fund of the idle capitalists.

It is evidently quite superfluous for the question now under discussion
to bring in somehow or other the division of the £100 between the idle
capitalists and their direct wage-labourers. The matter is simple: their
rent, interest, in short, their share in the surplus-value equal to £200, is
paid to them by the industrial capitalists in money to the amount of
£100. With these £100 they buy directly or indirectly articles of
consumption from the industrial capitalists. Thus they pay back to them
the £100 in money and take from them articles of consumption worth
£100.

This completes the reflux of the £100 paid by the industrial
capitalists in money to the idle capitalists. Is this reflux of money a
means of enriching the industrial capitalists, as Destutt imagines? Before
the transaction they had a sum of values amounting to £200, 100 being
money and 100 articles of consumption. After the transaction they have
only one half of the original sum of values. They have once more the
£100 in money, but they have lost the £100 in articles of consumption
which have passed into the hands of the idle capitalists. Hence they are
poorer by £100 instead of richer by £100. If instead of taking the
circuitous route of first paying out £100 in money and then receiving
this £100 in money back in payment of articles of consumption worth
£100, they had paid rent, interest, etc., directly in the bodily form of
their products, there would be no £100 in money flowing back to them
from the circulation, because they would not have thrown that amount
of money into the circulation. Via payment in kind the matter would
simply have taken this course: they would keep one half of the surplus-product
worth £200 for themselves and give the other half to the idle
capitalists without any equivalent in return. Even Destutt would not have
been tempted to declare this a means of getting richer. Of course the
land and capital borrowed by the industrial capitalists from the idle
capitalists and for which they have to pay a portion of their surplus-value
in the form of ground-rent, interest, etc., are profitable for them, for this
constitutes one of the conditions of production of commodities in general
and of that portion of the product which constitutes surplus-product or in
which surplus-value is represented. This profit accrues from the use of
the borrowed land and capital, not from the price paid for them. This
price rather constitutes a deduction from it. Otherwise one would have to
contend that the industrial capitalists would not get richer but poorer, if
they were able to keep the other half of their surplus-value for
themselves instead of having to give it away. This is the confusion which
results from mixing up such phenomena of circulation as a reflux of
money with the distribution of the product, which is merely promoted by
these phenomena of circulation.

And yet the same Destutt is shrewd enough to remark:

"Whence come the revenues of these idle gentry? Do the revenues not come out of the rent paid to them out of their profits by those who put the capitals of the former to work, i.e., by those who pay with the funds of the former a
labour which produces more than it costs, in a word, the industrial
capitalists? It is always necessary to hark back to them to find the
source of all wealth. It is they who in reality feed the wage-labourers
employed by the former." (p. 246.)

So now the payment of this rent, etc., is a deduction from the profit
of the industrial capitalists. Before it was a means wherewith they could
enrich themselves.

But at least one consolation is left to our Destutt. These good
industrialists handle the idle capitalists the same way they have been
handling one another and the labourers. They sell them all commodities
too dear, for instance, by 20 per cent. Now there are two possibilities.
The idle capitalists either have other money resources aside from the
£100 which they receive annually from the industrial capitalists, or they
have not. In the first case the industrial capitalists sell them
commodities worth £100 at a price of, say, £120. Consequently on
selling their commodities they recover not only the £100 paid to the
idlers but £20 besides, which constitute really new value for them. How
does the account look now? They have given away £100 in commodities
for nothing, because the £100 in money that they were paid in part for
their commodities were their own money. Thus their own commodities
have been paid with their own money. Hence they have lost £100. But
they have also received an excess of £20 in the price of their
commodities over and above their value, which makes £20 to the good.
Balance this against the loss of £100, and you still have a loss of £80.
Never a plus, always a minus. The cheating practised against the idle
capitalists has reduced the loss of the industrial capitalists, but for all
that it has not transformed a diminution of their wealth into a means of
enrichment. But this method cannot go on indefinitely, for the idle
capitalists cannot possibly pay year after year £120 in money if they
take in only £100 in money year after year.

There remains the other approach: The industrial capitalists sell
commodities worth £80 in exchange for the £100 in money they paid to
the idle capitalists. In this case, the same as before, they still give away
£80 for nothing, in the form of rent, interest, etc. By this fraudulent
means the industrial capitalists have reduced their tribute to the idlers,
but it still exists nevertheless and the idlers are in a position ; according
to the same theory proclaiming that prices depend on the good will of
the sellers ; to demand in the future £120 instead of £100, as formerly, for rent, interest, etc., on their land and capital.

This brilliant analysis is quite worthy of that deep thinker who copies
on the one hand from Adam Smith that

"labour is the source of all
wealth" (p. 242)

that the industrial capitalists

"employ their capital to
pay for labour that reproduces it with a profit" (p. 246)

and who concludes on the other hand that these industrial capitalists

"feed all the other people, are the only ones who increase the public wealth, and create all our means of enjoyment" (p. 242)

that it is not the capitalists who are fed by the labourers, but the labourers who are fed by the capitalists, for the brilliant reason that the money with which the
labourers are paid does not remain in their hands, but continually
returns to the capitalists in payment of the commodities produced by the
labourers.

"All they do is receive with one hand and return with the
other. Their consumption must therefore be regarded as engendered by
those who hire them." (p. 235.)

After this exhaustive analysis of social reproduction and consumption,
as being brought about by the circulation of money, Destutt continues:

"This is what perfects this perpetuum mobile of wealth, a movement which, though badly understood" (mal connu, I should say so!), "has justly been named circulation. For it is indeed a circuit and always returns to its point of departure. This is the point where production is
consummated." (pp. 239 and 240.)

Destutt, that very distinguished writer, membre de l'Institut de
France et de la Société Philosophique de Philadelphie, and in fact to a certain extent a luminary among the vulgar economists, finally requests
his readers to admire the wonderful lucidity with which he has presented
the course of social process, the flood of light which he has poured over
the matter, and is even condescending enough to communicate to his
readers, where all this light comes from. This must be read in the
original:

"It will be noted, I hope, how much this manner of viewing the consummation of our wealth is in accord with all we have been saying concerning its
production and distribution, and at the same time how much light it throws on
the entire course of society. Whence this accord and this lucidity? From the
fact that we have met truth face to face. This recalls the effect of those mirrors
in which things are reflected accurately and in their true proportions when
correctly focussed, but in which everything appears confused and disjointed
when one is too close or too far away from them." (pp. 242 and 243.)

Voilà le crétinisme bourgeois dans toute sa béatitude! 
[There you have the bourgeois idiocy in all its beatitude!]

Notes

45. "A considerable quantity of gold bullion ... is taken direct to the mint at San Francisco by the owners." Reports of H. M. Secretaries of Embassy and Legation, 1879, Part III, p. 337.

46. The study of the exchange of newly produced gold within the constant capital of department I is not contained in the manuscript. ; F.E.

47. A character in a number of works by the German humorist Fritz Reuter (1810-74). ; Ed.