Just as housework withers away, so the obligations of parents to their children wither away gradually until finally society assumes the full responsibility. Under capitalism, children were frequently a heavy and unbearable burden on the proletarian family. Communist society will come to the aid of the parents. In Soviet Russia, we already have homes for very small babies, creches, kindergartens, children's colonies, free school lunches, and free clothing distribution. All this goes to show that responsibility for the child is passing from the family to the collective.

Bourgeois society was afraid of going too far towards meeting the interests of the working class. For the capitalists are well aware that the old type of family, where the woman is a slave and where the husband is responsible for the well-being of his wife and children, constitutes the best weapon to stifle the desire of the working class for freedom. The worker is weighed down by his family cares and is obliged to compromise with capital.

Communist society considers the social education of the rising generation to be one of the fundamental aspects of the new life. The old family, narrow and petty, where the parents quarrel and are only interested in their own offspring, is not capable of educating the "new person". The playgrounds, gardens, and nurseries where the child will spend the day under qualified educators will offer an environment in which the child can grow up a conscious communist who recognises the need for solidarity, comradeship, and mutual help.

There is no escaping the fact: the old type of family has had its day. In place of the old relationship between men and women, a new one is developing: a union of affection and comradeship, a union of two equal members of communist society, both of them free, both of them independent and both of them workers.

Marriage will lose all the elements of material calculation which cripple family life. Marriage will be a union of two persons who love and trust each other. Once marriage such as the church used to perform has given place to the free and honest union of men and women who are lovers and comrades, prostitution will disappear. This evil has its roots in commodity production and private property.

In place of the individual and egoistic family, a great universal family of workers will develop, in which all the workers, men and women, will above all be comrades.