III. Accumulation of Money

Whether or not m, the surplus-value turned into money, is immediately
added to the capital-value in process and is thus enabled to enter the
circuit together with capital M now having the magnitude M', depends on
circumstances which are independent of the mere existence of m. If m is
to serve as money-capital in a second independent business, to be run side
by side with the first, it is evident that it cannot be used for this purpose
unless it is of the minimum size required for it. And if it is intended
to be used for the expansion of the original business, the relations between
the material factors of P and their value-relations likewise demand a minimum
magnitude for m. All the means of production employed in this business
have not only a qualitative but also a definite quantitative relation to
one another, are proportionate in quantity. These material relations as
well as the pertinent value-relations of the factors entering into the
productive capital determine the minimum magnitude m must possess to be
capable of transformation into additional means of production and labour-power,
or only into the former, as an accretion to the productive capital. Thus
the owner of a spinning-mill cannot increase the number of his spindles
without at the same time purchasing a corresponding number of carders and
roving frames, apart from the increased expenditure for cotton and wages
which such an expansion of his business demands. To carry this out the
surplus-value must therefore have reached a considerable figure (generally
calculated to be &pound;1 per newly installed spindle). If m does not reach
this minimum size the circuit of capital must be repeated until the sum
of m successively produced by it can function together with M, hence 
M' ; C'<LMP.
Even mere changes of detail, for instance in the spinning machinery, introduced
to make it more productive, require greater expenditures for spinning material,
more roving machinery, etc. In the meantime m is accumulated, and its accumulation
is not its own function but the result of repeated P ... P. Its own function
consists in persisting in the money state until it receives sufficient
increment from the repeated surplus-value-creating circuits, i.e., from
outside, to possess the minimum magnitude necessary for its active function,
the magnitude in which alone it can really enter as money-capital ; in
the case at hand as the accumulated part of the functioning of money-capital
M ; into the functioning of M. But in the interim it is accumulated and
exists only in the shape of a hoard in process of formation, of growth.
Hence the accumulation of money, hoarding, appears here as a process by
which real accumulation, the extension of the scale on which industrial
capital operates, is temporarily accompanied. Temporarily, for so long
as the hoard remains in the condition of a hoard, it does not function
as capital, does not take part in the process of creating surplus-value,
remains a sum of money which grows only because money, come by without
its doing anything, is thrown in the same coffer.

The form of a hoard is simply the form of money not in circulation,
of money whose circulation has been interrupted and which is therefore
fixed in its money-form. As for the process of hoarding, it is common to
all commodity production and figures as an end in itself only in the undeveloped,
pre-capitalist forms of this production. In the present case, however,
the hoard appears as a form of money-capital and the formation of a hoard
as a process which temporarily accompanies the accumulation of capital
because and so far as the money here figures as latent money-capital;
because the formation of a hoard, the state of being a hoard, in which
the surplus-value existing in money-form finds itself, is a functionally
determined preparatory stage gone through outside of the circuit described
by the capital and required for the transformation of the surplus-value
into really functioning capital. By its definition it is therefore latent
money-capital. Hence the size it must acquire before it can take part in
the process is determined in each case by the value constitution of the
productive capital. But so long as it remains in the condition of a hoard
it does not yet perform the functions of money-capital but is still idle
money-capital; not money-capital whose function has been interrupted, as
was the case before, but money-capital not yet capable of performing it.

We are here discussing the accumulation of money in its original
real form of an actual hoard of money. It may also exist in the form of
a mere outstanding money, of claims on debtors by capitalists who have
sold C'. As for other forms in which this latent money-capital may exist
in the meantime even in the shape of money-breeding money, such as interest-bearing
bank deposits, bills of exchange or securities of any description, these
do not belong here. Surplus-value realised in the form of money in such
cases performs special capital-functions outside the circuit described
by the industrial capital which originated it ; functions which in the
first place have nothing to do with that circuit as such but which in the
second place presuppose capital-functions which differ from the functions
of industrial capital and which have not yet been developed here.