IV. Reserve Fund

In the form in which we have just discussed, the hoard, as which the
surplus-value exists, is a fund for the accumulation of money, the money-form
temporarily assumed by capital accumulation and to that extent a condition
of this accumulation. However this accumulation-fund can also perform special
services of a subordinate nature, that is to say can enter into capital's
movement in circuits without this process assuming the form of P ... P',
hence without an expansion of capitalist reproduction.

If the process C' ; M' is prolonged beyond its normal duration,
if therefore the commodity capital is abnormally delayed in its transformation
into the money-form or if, for instance, after the completion of this transformation
the price of the means of production into which the money-capital must
be transformed has risen above the level prevailing at the beginning of
the circuit, the hoard functioning as accumulation-fund can be used in
the place of money-capital or of part of it. Thus the money-accumulation
fund serves as a reserve fund for counter-balancing disturbances in the
circuit.

As such a reserve fund it differs from the fund of purchasing
or paying media discussed in the circuit P ... P. These media are a part
of functioning money-capital (hence forms of existence of a part of capital-value
in general going through the process) whose parts enter upon their functions
only at different times, successively. In the continuous process of production,
reserve-money capital is always formed, since one day money is received
and no payments have to be made until later, and another day large quantities
of goods are sold while other large quantities are not due to be bought
until a subsequent date. In these intervals a part of the circulating capital
exists continuously in the form of money. A reserve fund on the other hand
is not a part of constituent capital already performing its functions,
or, to be more exact, of money-capital. It is rather a part of capital
in a preliminary stage of its accumulation, of surplus-value not yet transformed
into active capital. As for the rest, it needs no explaining that a capitalist
in financial straits does not concern himself about what the particular
functions of the money he has on hand are. He simply employs whatever money
he has for the purpose of keeping his capital circulating. For instance
in our illustration M is equal to &pound;422, M' to &pound;500. If a part
of the capital of &pound;422 exists as a fund of means of payment and purchase,
as a money reserve, it is intended, other conditions remaining the same,
that it should enter wholly into the circuit, and besides should suffice
for this purpose. The reserve fund however is a part of the &pound;78 of
surplus-value. It can enter the circular course of the capital worth &pound;422
only to the extent that this circuit takes place under conditions not remaining
the same; for it is a part of the accumulation-fund, and figures here without
any extension of the scale of reproduction.

Money-accumulation fund implies the existence of latent money-capital,
hence the transformation of money into money-capital.

The following is the general formula for the circuit of productive
capital. It combines simple reproduction and reproduction on a progressively
increasing scale:

If P equals P, then M in 2) equals M' minus m; if P equals P', then M in
2) is greater than M' minus m; that is to say m has been completely or
partially transformed into money-capital.

The circuit of productive capital is the form in which classical
Political Economy examines the circular movement of industrial capital.

Notes

6a The term "latent" is borrowed from the idea of latent heat in physics, which has now been almost replaced by the theory of the transformation of energy. Marx therefore uses in the third
part (a later version), another term, borrowed from the idea of potential
energy, viz.: "potential" or analogous to the virtual velocities of D'Alembert, "virtual capital." ; Ed.